# 1 - Allucio and the Observatory

Allucio started his way uphill for his nightly observations. He would never tire of the views on his path. The woods would open here and there to allow for an extended view over the dark ocean around the hill almost as if it were an island. Actually, it was the tip of a small peninsula with a narrow strip of land connecting it to the continent. The hill was a geographical anomaly, a single high spot on an otherwise barely undulating plain, located right below Heaven, the twin planet of Mother, ever present in the sky in its fixed position, immovable, straight overhead of the hill. No wonder that this very piece of land was sacred. No temple tower, no ziggurat could ever reach any closer to Heaven, where all life came from. It was suitably called Pinnacle, and over a ledge on the sea-side, almost at the very top of it, was the Observatory where he was heading.

Since it was early in the night, Heaven was just past crescent. The reddish tones of the sunset still dominated on the western horizon; the evening wind was just calming down. Most higher beings in Mother would be sleeping for the long night except for the few, like himself, who were insomniacs. Pinnacle, as the whole world, was quiet and dark as normal people have turned off their lights and fires and shut themselves in their homes for the long sleep. Allucio would often catch himself referring to others as 'normal people' unable to rid himself of the prejudiced language that still hung over his kind.

Centuries ago, he would have been an outcast, possibly even lynched accused of any death or robbery that might have happened overnight, or forcibly married to justify an unexpected pregnancy, even though women were not fertile during the night. Many would hide what was considered a decease, others would remain cloistered during the night in the shelters provided by the religious orders, returning to their normal lives during the day. A small number did take advantage of their neighbors who, in deep hibernation, would be unable to protect themselves, their beloveds or their belongings from marauding insomniacs. The perception of insomnia as a decease, which turned a few into outcasts, unable to get a decent job, condemned the many to boring nights either concealing their nightly restlessness or jailing themselves overnight in the shelters.

Over decades, the prejudice subsided and insomniacs were able to live better lives and particularly useful night lives. Forest fires and floods do not respect the day and night cycle, and the best protection against a night intruder is a night watchman. Industrialization and the enlargement of cities also brought many good jobs. Ships used to anchor overnight as the whole crew slept. Valuable cargo remained motionless half the time when it was not lost in an overnight storm. Now, the big shipping companies would have night crews who rested during the day and would take over from the day crews for the long stretches at sea since it made little sense to dock in ports during the night when there would be no stevedores on the shore.

Cities and factories also required night attendants to handle their intricacies or to do maintenance work while production lines were idle. As the cities grew distancing their inhabitants from the fields, fresh fruits and vegetables could be brought overnight from the last harvest of the day and arrive for breakfast.

Much of the coasts of the uninhabited continent right in the hemisphere at the far side from Heaven had been explored thanks to mixed crews that could keep sailing across the huge ocean that separated it from the inhabited side. Not that you could sail much at night on the far side since the light of Heaven would never reach there, but the sun did, and the insomniacs were able to take the watches while the rest of the crew slept in broad sunlight until they adjusted their day/night cycle to the local time. The interest for discoveries soon abated since the far side proved to be very dull. Brief excursions inland confirmed that the far continent had no signs of human habitation and it remained the dominion of plants, insects and small animals.

Though the prejudice still lingered, many insomniacs earned better incomes than their hibernating peers. Some had further day jobs earning an extra salary, others spent their nightly income during the days. Both Allucio's parents were of the first type, hard working and good earners, which allowed them to reach, from a modest upbringing in the countryside, a comfortable lifestyle in the city. Allucio was able to attend the best schools and have good tutors and, in the end, arrive at Pinnacle to work on the most important observatory in Mother.

---

The Observatory had been there since before the Great Collapse so there were almost no records of its construction or any justification for its existence. It was almost at the top of Pinnacle, just below the peak on a rocky ledge at the far side of the continent, so as to be sheltered from any lights reaching from the cities on the coast. The barren ledge had also saved it from many a forest fire. All these spared it the fate of the Great Temple, built on the slope facing the continent. Due to its symbolic value, the Great Temple have often been the first target for capture or destruction on any war so it had been rebuilt innumerable times, while the Observatory remained untouched.

The Observatory did face some risks; some religious scholars considered it a blasphemy, a crude attempt at peeking at the life of the Gods, and a stupid one at that, since the Gods were just as ethereal in Heaven as much as they were in Mother. Others tried to see the Observatory as a symbol, but few agreed on what it was meant to symbolize. A fact remained true, it was one of a few things that remained almost untouched from before the Great War and the Collapse that followed, when civilization broke down and famine and decease brought humanity to the brink of extinction. Dirt, rust, bird droppings and the forces of nature did some damage but they could be fixed and it had been done with utmost care during the Reconstruction.

Allucio turned the last bend and came to the clearing right in front of the observatory. The building was mostly flat except for a tower right in the middle about three stories high where the telescope was housed, pointing straight up, towards Heaven. He entered the building and turned on the soft lights that would let him find his way around but not get blinded. A quick glance at the anemometer showed that there was still some breeze, strong enough to blow dust and dead leaves around so he had to wait to open the roof. Dirt could damage the reflector and such damage was costly to repair.

The technique for building a telescope like the one in the Observatory was long lost. Nobody knew how to make such flawless pieces of glass; all attempts to build mirrors not even half as wide as the main reflector had resulted in cracked or distorted pieces that no amount of polishing could correct and nobody had found a way to manufacture such an elaborate surface as that of the smaller secondary mirror. It took quite a while to figure out how to redo the silvery coating on the mirrors and it had been fortunate that none of the failed attempts did any great damage to the glass surface. A few scars on the edges remained from those attempts but most of it remained perfectly usable.

Allucio started unpacking his papers, his favorite tea and some snack to eat, and putting them in their usual places, then he put water to boil and checked that the thermos bottle was empty and clean. He had an assistant, as most of his colleagues had, but he was a sleeper so his assistant left everything ready for him during the day, but at night he had to manage alone. While the water heated up, he began browsing through his last observations and his plans for that night.

The surface of Heaven, at least the only hemisphere always visible from Mother, was well mapped in its contours; the far side remained a mystery. Allucio meant to determine the height of the main features on the surface, something that until then had only been guessed at, by measuring the span of the shade they projected. He had an advantage over most previous observers, he could work during the night, when it was daytime on Heaven. He actually believed that the best observations over the centuries had been done by other insomniacs like himself.

The quality of the historical observations was quite varied. They fell into two clearly defined categories, the detailed and consistent and the raw guesswork. He meant to work on these on a later project, figuring out who had been an insomniac and who a sleeper. He knew that an ancestor of his, being an insomniac, was regularly cloistered in the shelter at the footsteps of Pinnacle and that he lived about the time of a pretty decent set of observations that were signed by the Head Astronomer. His own observations would still be signed by the current Head Astronomer but it has been decades since the actual observer also got credited by name. Since one of the branches of his family had always lived nearby and insomnia run deep in the family, it was a source of inner pride for him to imagine that several ancestors might have been involved in the good observations, though he was the first to bear the title of Astronomer and be credited as such.

The telescope pointed straight up and could be moved a couple of grads away from the vertical on any direction to allow it to focus on any point on Heaven's surface. Originally, the telescope could move about 20 grads from the vertical and reach beyond the disk of Heaven and thus see the stars, but an earlier Head Astronomer, possibly tired of having to climb the external ladder to the top, decided to build a spiral staircase inside the tower itself, thus robbing it from the space needed to swing the telescope away from Heaven. The stair didn't touch the telescope, but it greatly restricted its movement. At its maximum offset from the vertical, it could focus on the stars beyond the edges of Heaven but only for a brief time since they would either hide behind Heaven or escape from the reach of the telescope and poorly since the glare of Heaven would blind the observer. This made Allucio think that the stairs had been designed or paid for by sleepers who only saw the stars during solar eclipses, an uncomfortable time for them since they weren't used to darkness, so they seldom wondered about them. Perhaps it had been more important to have a magnificent spiral staircase to show wealthy sponsors the beautifully crafted telescope than doing any actual observations with it.

The water boiled so he turned off the heat and put the tea leaves in the kettle. Another look at the anemometer showed that the breeze was dying out so he could start opening the louvers at the base of the building and let the fresh air come in. He started to climb the spiral stairs. On the first platform he checked on the gimbals which held the telescope tube and allowed it to move in any direction. It was all part of the routine and he did it out of custom, after all he knew one of the assistants had checked everything a little over an hour ago and in all these years he had never found a problem. He reached the upper platform and, after removing its cover, checked the secondary mirror. He picked the broom and went through the door outside to the balcony around the top to see if anything big might have fallen on the roof that might fall on the telescope when opening it. A quick loop around the balcony showed nothing. There was a piece of canvas right below to catch anything small that might fall, but it was better to prevent it. He went back inside, left the broom by the door, which he closed, unlatched the roof and started turning the hand crank to open it. He then untied the canvas covering and pushed it to a side, leaving the big telescope open to the sky.

Back again on the ground floor, he looked for the box with the eyepiece, opened it, took it off and after a quick check, placed it by the side of the observation chair, to have it at hand when the time came to use it. Finally, he opened the iris cover of the main reflector.

The temperature of the telescope had to settle first. As the sun went under the horizon the air temperature was falling but the building still held some hot air within. With the roof open, the air would start to circulate upwards, the cooler air coming in filtered through the vents in the lower floor, and the whole instrument would cool down evenly. In the meantime, he could start using it for some low resolution work. Heaven had clouds and even storms so not all parts of it could be seen at any time. Allucio had some spots that were often clouded so that he had never been able to get any good readings from them. He checked those places first.

He sat on the observation chair. It wasn't a chair at all, more like a short stretcher on four short coaster wheels instead of legs so it laid low on the floor. The backrest was hinged and had a couple of springs so that it could be unlatched and pushed to be completely horizontal or let it rise thanks to the springs. It was short because it only supported the torso. The observer would  use his legs to push himself around when laying down. It had a couple of side boards to place pens, notebooks and whatever might be needed when doing observations. Allucio laid down on the stretcher, picked the eyepiece from the box by the side and used his legs to push himself until his whole upper body went under the telescope. Once right under the hole in the large reflector, he attached the eyepiece to the mount. He then moved until he could see through the eyepiece and, unlatching the back of the chair and helped by the springs, raised his upper body to look through the eyepiece without any effort and then latched it back again.

The light came into the telescope and fell over the main reflector at the bottom. It bounced back and concentrated on the secondary reflector which was at the very top, held by three thin rods to the sides of the tube, so as to block as little light as possible. The light would then come down once again and go through a hole in the middle of the main reflector, where the eyepiece was mounted, and there is where the observer laid, right at the bottom of the instrument. This setup with the light bouncing twice within the instrument allowed for a much shorter telescope that it could be otherwise, and still it was three stories high. The tube was supported by the gimbals at about a third of its height. The main reflector being quite heavy, hung from the lower third of the tube which was quite robust. The upper two thirds only held the much smaller secondary mirror at the very top, thus the structure was much lighter, but it still needed to be stiff to keep the reflector in its place without any sort of movement or vibration.

A couple of hand cranks helped to point the telescope. The observer could easily reach them when laying down under it. One allowed the telescope to depart from the vertical. In theory, with the dial for that hand crank at zero, the telescope would point straight up to the place in Heaven equivalent to Pinnacle, the place in Heaven closer to Mother which, as a matter of fact, was also a mountain peak. In practice, both Heaven and Mother wobbled very slowly on their axes and the zero of the telescope had to be reset. Theologians would not accept any wobbly imperfection on Heaven, "Wobble? What do you mean wobble? How do you dare?" they would say. They were divided about Mother's perfection or even its perfectibility but, being a touchy subject the adjustment was formally attributed to imperfections in the telescope itself. Unfortunately, this also meant that the complex harmonic interplay of both celestial bodies could not be studied and certainly never published so only drafts and notes, cryptic enough to hide their implications, survived.

As the telescope moved away from vertical, it would go up to the edges of the visible disk and then a little more to the faraway sky. The other hand crank would spin the whole assembly around so that with the first hand crank set to look at the edge of Heaven, it could go all around the edge by turning the second hand crank. The whole instrument was so well balanced that the gears could be disengaged and moved by hand but being careful not to let it gather speed and hit the spiral staircase. Two indexes on the telescope pointed to a couple of fixed graduated rulers to give its overall position, which the dials complemented by showing the fractional movement. The first ruler and its dial were graduated in turns of the hand crank which were converted to actual grads of fall in Heaven via tables. Just as Pinnacle was at zero grads of fall in Mother, with Heaven shining straight atop, so zero grads of fall in Heaven was the place where Mother was straight up. Fall circles in Heaven would look, ideally, like a bullseye as seen from Mother, with the outer rim of the planet being 100 grads of fall. The other ruler was marked in grads and the dial around the hand crank marked in hundredths of a grad with the zero pointing to Heaven's sunrise, which was on the opposite side of Mother's sunrise going all the way to four hundred for a full turn, but they counted in the other direction since sunrise and sunset where the other way in Heaven.

----

He knew by heart the point coordinates of the toughest of those blind spots in his observations. He would have no luck with them this night either, they were as clouded as ever. He checked the next few places where readings were scarce and there he got lucky, one of those places was clear. He preferred orderly and methodical observations, but the weather on Heaven was just as messy, that is, "inscrutable to us mere mortals", as the theologians preferred to state it, as on Mother and he had to adapt to catch any readings he could possibly get on those tough spots.

He would look for places close to the terminator, either at sunrise or sunset, because those cast the longest shadows. During the first part of his night he would look at places in Heaven's sunrise. Then the eclipse would occur right when Heaven was full and he would switch to the other side, watching the places right before sunset. Shadows showed only the relative height of one feature to another so a whole set of continuous points were needed to actually make a full profile of the surface. The oceans provided a zero level for all references so the places near the coasts got the best elevation profiles. For major continents, though, he had very few reliable, coast to coast profiles. Clouds and storms were often to blame but he could wait for those phenomena to pass. Flat or slightly sloping terrain, though, were a permanent gap in his maps he could do nothing about since they projected almost no shadow and were mostly indistinguishable from one another. He just had to map everything around it and interpolate the plains.

He was becoming quite good at predicting the weather on Heaven. He wished he could see Mother from above to try out his own weather forecasting abilities. He could not measure temperature, pressure or wind speed and direction in Heaven but the cloud formations he could see above his head on Mother looked and behaved quite like those on Heaven. That would not really be a great discovery since the sacred texts said that the Gods made Mother like their own home in Heaven. Priests were never happy to hear scientific confirmation of their beliefs since that would imply that they might have been in doubt in the first place. They were even less happy about contradictions. As a matter of fact, they never seemed very happy at all as he knew all too well.

All higher education was in the hands of the religious orders and he had a quite extensive religious education and most of it came from very dull, sad or angry priests. Formally, he was a ThD, a Doctor of Theology, or so said his diploma, but then, all diplomas said the same since that was the only doctoral degree awarded by his college. Some students went for all the religion they could get to be ordained priests, others, like himself, took the minimum required and went for other subjects such as science. All his theology was worth to him was to let him formulate his discoveries in ways that would not openly contradict the established doctrine or to write his requests for resources since they were all controlled by the religious orders such as the the one that had the Pinnacle in custody.

After a few hours of observations, he slid out from under the telescope, stood and closed the petal cover on the mirror. He needed to stretch his legs a little bit and let his eyes rest. He had some salad and fresh fruit for his meal. He would consume the fresh produce while it lasted but by the midnight eclipse, it would be gone and it would be all preserves until the morning when he could go down to the refectory and enjoy the fresh produce brought overnight to the city and delivered to the kitchens as soon as the gates to Pinnacle were open.

He took a nap after the meal. Insomniacs would not hibernate during the long night, but they would take regular naps as everyone did even during the day. Then, it was down again on the observation chair to check whether the storms on the crucial points had cleared or otherwise going through the usual routine of checking the places near the terminator as it advanced over time, where the shadows were the easiest to see.

And so it went all through the night, except for a couple of occasions were some clouds passed right above Pinnacle and prevented any observations. Allucio would simply take a leisurely meal and a long nap and, if by the time he woke up the clouds were still there, he would start translating his observations into actual elevations or, more likely, reading whatever took his fancy. When Heaven turned almost full he couldn't do many readings, except on the edge still in the dark, but then came the midnight eclipse of Heaven which was always an interesting opportunity to watch the faraway stars at the edges. He enjoyed the view and, most of all, the changes in color as Heaven went from yellow to orange then reddish, brownish until it finally got black and then all the way back to white again.

After the eclipse he would then work on Heaven's western side as the other terminator swept through. The western half was always the hardest since the atmosphere, warm from the sun would be more unstable, windy, with more clouds, storms and dust floating around. By then, he was also somewhat tired and bored so he didn't spend so much time up in the observation chair, but that wouldn't show in his reports. Nature already provided a good excuse.
