# 3 - Signals from Heaven

Allucio was almost done with his observations for his current project, his calculations close to completion and already thinking about what to do next. He would have at most another night of observations, but as things stood, there was a good chance that he might wrap it up tonight. Some points were missing, but they were few and could reasonably be interpolated from points around them, and he could not spend night after night just hoping to get lucky and get a clear view without clouds or dust storms at dawn or dusk as would be required.

As the midnight eclipse approached he was more and more intrigued by the observation the anonymous benefactor of the department requested. He half expected to see some sort of optical illusion which might surprise an amateur or perhaps some shape or shade that, under the right lighting conditions such as during the eclipse and with a lesser instrument than his telescope, would produce an image of some esoteric meaning, but all this clashed with the impression that the benefactor was no simple amateur at all.

He had confirmed that some of the questions asked by Enuas, his department head, about his previous works had been on behalf of the benefactor though at the time Enuas was not allowed to disclose the origin. Enuas half apologized for what could have been interpreted as deception on his part by presenting as his what came from someone else. Knowing the reason for it, Allucio didn't find fault in what Enuas had done but it made him realize that he wasn't as knowledgeable as he once thought. Admittedly, Enuas had lost some stature from that idealized person he first knew when still a student to the respected senior colleague he was now. He had often wondered how could he know that much about the night sky when he wasn't an insomniac. He had assumed Enuas' questions had been based on previous works from earlier astronomers, many of whom had been insomniacs, but as he gained experience and read many of those works, it seemed less and less probable. The department had been without insomniacs for long stretches of time, possibly two thirds of its existence, and the works in those periods were, at best, informed guesswork, at worst, utter fantasy.

Which meant that the benefactor was an insomniac and a good astronomer, or had access to works by one or several good insomniac astronomers and understood their job. But then, there was the number four, the guessing game or whatever it was that put it all in doubt. Anyway, Allucio moved the telescope to point to the requested coordinates. He first disengaged the fall hand crank to set the coarse fall by hand and re-engaged it. Then he did the same for the azimuth hand crank. Only then he started turning the hand cranks to do the fractional adjustment, first of fall, then of azimuth. He looked through the eyepiece though it was still too early. The area was a mostly featureless plain, at the time free of clouds or dust, good for observation though boring. He still had half an hour until the eclipse so it was a good time to have something to eat.

His first meals during the night were mostly fruits and fresh vegetables but they didn't last that long and, anyway, with the temperature going down, cooked meals felt more appealing. He was not a great cook. During the day he would go to the refectory where he could get a much wider variety of food than he could imagine or, at least, it was the same food with an amazing variety of presentations and combinations, but unless he could find and pay for an insomniac cook, at night he was bound to cook for himself. Now that he was a senior member of the Order, he got some privileges; he was entitled, for example, to eat in his apartment and he tried once, but found it wasn't worth the trouble. A couple of nights later he thought to trade that privilege to having some meals prepared for his overnight stay so now, instead of the bland dishes he usually cooked --he had never been good with spices-- he had an ample provision of sealed jars with very tasty dishes which he only needed to warm by putting the jar in boiling water for a few minutes and serve or, as of lately, eat right out of the jar. Thus, he was also spared of washing the dishes and pans.

So, with a full belly and his taste buds still tingling, he sat down on the observation chair and slid under the telescope. He checked the coordinates once again. You had to let the instrument settle since, due to its weight, it might bend one way or another so you had to adjust once again once it settled. All this was taken care in the centuries old setup tables, a copy of which were always by the telescope, where the coordinates on Heaven were translated to turns of the hand cranks.

He went out and saw the disk of Heaven still fully lit. A few minutes later, a shade started to show on the edge, almost imperceptible at first, invisible to the untrained eye, but he knew where to look so he found it easy enough. The shadow would still take a couple of minutes to reach the area the telescope was focused on. Normally, he would have been inside trying to get some more readings, but with his project almost completed, there wasn't much to be done so now, for once in a long time, he could enjoy the view. The colors changing from the bright white of the clouds going through yellow, dim orange, reddish brown, dark brown and finally almost black. In areas without clouds, the colors of the terrain or the water would merge with the reddish brown light projected by the atmosphere of Mother filtering the light from the sun producing innumerable hues.

The terminator was reaching the spot he was meant to watch so he went inside, took his normal position under the eyepiece and started looking. The shadow was creeping into his field of view and in no time it spanned the whole area. Not a minute passed that he seemed to see a flicker of light slightly off towards the left and below the center point. He focused on that and indeed, there was a long pinpoint of light that lasted for about 5 seconds and then flashed, and flashed again and a couple more times and stopped and, after a while, it flashed again, and so on up to four times. Another gap and another four flashes and another gap and four more flashes and, finally, a long, steady light about 5 seconds long.

As was his custom, he had his notebook open on the side board and a pencil in his hand so he could take notes or draw something. In this case, about half way through the sequence he started drawing dashes when the light was on and leaving gaps when off. He started to try to complete the sequence of dashes, filling in the initial ones before he started to draw them down, with one eye on the notebook and another on the eyepiece when another long flash occurred, which made him pay attention once again, this time taking notes from the very start. The sequence repeated itself, or at least he assumed it repeated since the first time it got him unprepared and he wasn't sure. There was a long time on, four sequences of four flashes and another long time on to end the sequence.

His mind was already working fast on that. He had often seen bright reflections coming from what he assumed might be salt flats which, when the light hit them at a particular angle, would glare so bright that it would blind him. Sometimes it was a small lake which in a windless day might be so flat as to be a mirror. But this was different, it flashed. Lakes sometimes did that. A gust of wind would ripple the surface and destroy the reflection which would resume as the gust passed and the surface returned to flat. Sometimes it was the reflection from a river which would flash at random as the light bounced off this or that stretch as it meandered on its course. But all this occurred when the surface of Heaven was in daylight, not when it was in darkness as it now was.

As he was thinking all this, another sequence started, identical to the previous, which he had drawn from the start, and the first one, which he half guessed at. Time! He needed to measure time! How long were these sequences? He looked around. The wall clock didn't have a seconds hand, there was nothing within reach to measure such short intervals of time. His heart! He once read some scientist, long ago, used his own pulse to measure time. He tried his wrists but couldn't locate any pulse. Then he got interrupted by the long dash of another sequence. He tried his temples and got a pulse but it was quite obvious that his heart was racing fast so it was of no use since he didn't know how fast. His other hand was drawing the dashes on the notebook. At least he would try to move his hand at a constant pace so the relative on-off time would be valid. A pendulum, he needed a pendulum. He dared to take his eye off the eyepiece and slide from under the telescope to reach a piece of string which he had used to tie the books and folders he brought with him and saw lying in the floor. He was untying it with both hands and his teeth with only one eye, the other once again looking through the eyepiece when he saw the trailing edge of the eclipse crossing through his field of view. He didn't stop. He assumed the sequence might resume even though it might be difficult to see with the midday sun falling on Heaven. His fingers were straining with those knots and his eye with that spot on Heaven but after a while he realized the eclipse was almost over and there would be no time for any more flashes so it seemed pointless to carry on.

He moved away from the telescope, stood up, went to the desk and turned on the light to see his notebook. It had taken him three pages, the first two sequences in the first page and then a page for each later sequence. The first sequence was not complete, he started drawing dashes about half way through it. He was about to draw that first half while still at the telescope when the second sequence started so he didn't manage to do it. He was about to pick a larger sheet from another pad when it dawned on him, there was the number four all over. Four sequences made of a long dash and four repetitions of four flashes and a long, end-of-sequence dash. Four, four and four all over. The magic trick!

Damned if he was going to get tricked by such a silly prank. He immediately went out of the building expecting to see someone running away. He went in and up the stairs to the balcony to see further away. He went all around the roof opening to try to find some projector, mirrors, whatever optical device that might have been used to fool him. He looked at the trees around, but they were all well below him. The top of Pinnacle itself was the only thing higher than the Observatory. He rushed down the stairs, out of the building to the road spiraling up. At the crossroads he stopped to listen. He wasn't sure how much time had passed in between the last sequence and his arrival there at that crossing. Anyone coming down should travel that road. Could they have folded their projector or whatever it was and rushed down already past this point? He strained his hearing to detect any footsteps or wheels going down, but heard nothing. It might be some mechanism driven by clockwork and it might still be up there so he went searching for it. He got a good look at the observatory from the edge of the platform on the top of Pinnacle and he looked all around, but found nothing at all. Some clockwork mechanism would explain it all. There were no other insomniacs in Pinnacle to play the prank on him. The shelters for the insomniacs had not been used for decades and, anyway, when they were used, they remained closed during the night, as was Pinnacle itself. Someone might reach Pinnacle by boat, there was a pier to take supplies from boats, but the stair up the cliff was also closed. There were another beaches but, but ... This was crazy.

He returned to the Observatory and took a portable lamp. He was so used to walk during the night with just the light from Heaven that he hardly ever used one. He went all around the observatory looking everywhere for any sign of some device capable of producing those flashes and projecting them into the telescope. He returned to the top of Pinnacle. He looked at the sea, wishing to see a row boat leaving Pinnacle with an escaping prankster, he went around the top once again with his lamp. Still nothing. He went back to the Observatory. He wanted to calm down so he entered the kitchen to heat some water for tea. His mind was switching in between figuring out how someone could project that point of light into the telescope from somewhere here on Mother and what natural process could have produced those flashes of light on Heaven. He meant to do some thorough search of the area around the Observatory at daybreak and, in the meantime, he would search all the Observatory.

He should have moved the telescope, he thought, or shaken it. The projected image would have moved with the telescope or would have gone out of focus or something. Too late for that now. However, he realized that the image was fixed to the ground, that is, the ground of Heaven. The telescope was always moving almost imperceptibly, it couldn't be avoided. It was very little, so much so that your eyes automatically compensated for that. You had to really pay attention to notice. You had to take the edges of the image as a reference and then you would see it move but in the center your own eyes would deal with it as they normally dealt with your head which is constantly moving and the arteries pulsating around your eyeballs. Your brain compensated for all that moving and shaking, it anchored the image to visual references in the background. He would have noticed if the light moved relative to the surface, if it didn't match the other visual clues on the ground, but it really had seemed steady in that place. Which reminded him he had not fixed the position.

The water was boiling so he made his tea, strained it into the thermos bottle and poured himself a cup. A very elaborate prank but with Enuas and the trustee and who knows who else involved? After all, it had been the trustee who asked him for the magic number. No it couldn't be, not Enuas and certainly not the trustee since they only met formally, a prank required a closer relationship. He felt like turning around to see Enuas watching him from some corner in the room, but Enuas was a sleeper, or was that part of the prank? Perhaps the whole faculty was involved in it, perhaps it was some sort of tradition, now that he was part of the upper echelons. Not a year ago the Librarian gave him a glimpse of the gossip that went about up there. Was there more to it? Were pranks part of some jovial initiation rite? He just had to remember the bored and dull faces of the Heads to discard that idea outright. Even with some alcohol into their system there wasn't much joviality in them. A challenge? That seemed more plausible.

Once again in the observation chair, with a cup of tea in the sideboard, he looked through the eyepiece. The location of the source of the light was clear in his memory. Some terrain features around it provided good references. He used the hand cranks to move the telescope and have the place right in the center. Then he read the dials and used the tables to do the conversion back to fall and azimuth. He went to the file to pick a map of the area and spread it on the large desk. He checked his own notes and graphs to learn something about the area.

The names on the old charts were such a joke that they were hardly used any more. Very poetical and traditional; pages and pages of mythology were laid down on the surface of Heaven but hardly a grain of common sense was to be found. Mythology was easy to laugh at but religion was not, though Allucio could not quite see the difference in between one and the other. Religion just had the power to enforce itself upon the people, an idea Allucio was careful not to share aloud. You could no longer be burned at the stake for professing doubts about some religious tenet but Heaven was still the home of the Gods and some of the geography got named by prophets and seers and it was bad manners to laugh at them.

As for the rest of the named features, as an astronomer it was a matter of prestige to get your own name on a feature of Heaven, but most of the naming had been done by sleepers who could hardly see anything of Heaven except during the midday eclipse so they mostly managed to put their names or those of their patrons on optical illusions, clouds or dust storms. Those were soon forgotten but many others remained. Rivers that ended up being the snowed caps of some tall mountains, chasms that were the edges of vegetated plains contrasting against a line of rocky outcroppings. Much of the geography of Heaven had been based on such mistaken observations. Rivers must run down in valleys while mountain peaks go up so if you call a mountain range a river, you have to thoroughly misrepresent the elevations of the surrounding terrain to make it fit those imagined features. That was what Allucio was trying to fix in his project. He meant to get the elevations on Heaven right once and for all. That would settle in which direction rivers flowed, if they were rivers at all, as well as fix many other disputed features. However, he avoided names, he didn't want to get in trouble with the priests telling them that half the places named in their holy texts didn't match reality.

He finally located the place in his charts. It was a dull kind of place, no significant features anywhere near. A wide plateau of medium elevation, with no rivers, coasts or mountains of any significance anywhere close. A dry place, with cloudless skies, with a little rain during a couple of days during winter. You could be certain there would be clear skies over it in this season and visibility would be good. Out of curiosity he checked the name on the old charts, "Doubters Purgatory" was the name. He recalled that the name came from some sort of old poem with some religious connection, the place where those whose faith was uncertain wandered endlessly waiting for enlightenment at which point they would suddenly find the start of the path to bliss descending in front of them, like the end of a long carpet unrolling down from the sky, a somewhat silly image since they were already in Heaven. If they went any higher they would be, what, back at Mother? Anyway, the path or magic carpet or whatever it was lead them to wherever the Gods lived and become one of them. Lifelong membership with the catch that you had to be dead to apply.

Half the night remained, time enough to write a report on his observations to the benefactor. How to handle it, was it really an elaborate prank? He would not discard that possibility, he would still look for an explanation on the ground but he could hardly ignore what he saw, but how to put it in his report? How fitting, Allucio thought, "Doubters Purgatory." He certainly was in doubt about what to do.
