# 4 - Barging through the Canals

"Do you have a report for our benefactor regarding his request?" asked the trustee somewhat brusquely at their regular meeting as soon as the usual courtesies were over.

"Yes, here it is," replied Allucio handing him the envelope with the report.

"You were able to do the observation, then."

"Yes, I can confirm I saw some unusual phenomenon at the given coordinates at the indicated time. As to the nature of the phenomenon, I can't say. It is all there in the report."

"That is enough as far as I am concerned. I've been instructed to give you further instructions. As I told you in our previous meeting, our benefactor meant you to observe that spot without prejudicing you with foreknowledge. Since you've done the observation, I can now give you the rest. I would expect this might provide you with further clues," said the trustee and handed Allucio a further envelope. "Don't wait, please, do read it," which Allucio did.

The letter confirmed that the phenomenon he had observed was directly influenced by them, the number of repetitions being a proof of that. Allucio noted the use of the plural, the benefactor was not a single individual or, if he was, he represented a group of people. The letter apologized for the secrecy and asked Allucio to keep quiet about the phenomenon observed. As part of that secret, they asked him to visit his mother, when there would be many possibilities to get in touch discreetly. Another alternative was to forget all about this, keep quiet and never mention it again.

The letter excluded the final alternative: he could make his observation public. It wouldn't be a wise option since, for starters, nobody would believe it. There were only his notes about it, a set of coordinates the trustee had given him, which didn't mean much, and a magic number which the trustee would deny having ever talked about. In fact, the letter assured, the trustee would deny all of this conversation, not because he was involved in any way but because he was known to be discreet and had been hired precisely for that. That is why the experiment could not be repeated, they would not want to give him chance to gather other witnesses, few as they could be since they would need to be insomniacs.

The letter reminded Allucio that Heaven was sacred ground and that this experiment could have serious consequences with the religious authorities who, after all, were the owners of Pinnacle, the Observatory and the institution he was working at. Thus, the letter assured the need for discretion was as much for his benefit as theirs.

If he agreed to meet, he would have to leave Pinnacle early in the following day, thus the letter instructed him to let the trustee know that he would skip the next appointment, that would be enough for them to know about his decision.

"Well," said the trustee when Allucio raised his eyes from the letter, "anything interesting a person like myself could understand? I admit that Master Enuas has tried to explain some of these scientific exchanges of yours once in a while with little success. I wish to believe I am not totally useless in practical matters, I can tie my shoelaces, you know."

"Well, I'm afraid it is not terribly exciting," started Allucio trying to figure out what could he say. He remembered one of the guesses he had made about what the benefactor could have seen before seeing the flashes, a real phenomenon that has been observed elsewhere, and said, "the place has a soil composition that produces an unusual effect when seen in the dark while still hot from the midday sun."

"That is not really what your report says, is it?" replied the trustee pointing to the envelope Allucio had handed him earlier. "For some reason you were asked to be discreet and I would be very disappointed if you had disclosed this information so lightly."

"No, I made that up," replied Allucio, "I didn't mean to be discourteous."

"So you preferred to lie to me."

"I'm sorry, I wasn't thinking clearly."

"That is fine. Not that I like people lying to me all the time but I prefer a white lie to someone who goes babbling all around. If there is something you cannot tell me, just let me know and I won't ask any more. I've been straight with you telling you what I can tell you and what I cannot. I don't think you felt that offensive."

"No, you are right. I cannot tell you what the observation is about, sorry."

"That's fine, so we just understand each other. Anything else?"

"Yes, I will visit my mother during the next day and I have to leave early so I'm afraid I have to skip our next meeting."

"Your assistant will come with the accounts, I trust."

"Yes, of course, unless something comes up."

"And you will visit your mother."

"I must. I'm afraid I can't tell you more."

"Good, you learn fast."

----

When the next morning came, Allucio was ready to leave after breakfast. He had wrapped up his observations and came down to his apartment early to pack everything for his trip. Actually, he came down far earlier than required because now his apartment was far more comfortable than his previous quarters and better than the living quarters up at the Observatory.

He left Pinnacle shortly after breakfast. At that time, the barges that had carried the fresh produce overnight would be ready to go back up river to do a couple or more day trips. When he was younger he had earned some extra money working on those barges during the night when there were no classes. Student by day, deckhand by night, such had been his life for a few years. He knew several barge owners so it was a simple matter of going to the pool and see who was around to buy a ride back home.

The side gates to Pinnacle had just opened and it was mostly suppliers who went through carrying the fresh produce.  A few devotees were also arriving for personal prayers since no services would be offered until later. The main gate would then be opened.  Allucio was the only one walking along the causeway against this flow of people.  He crossed the roundabout at the intersection of the Promenade and the causeway which, once inland, turned into the Boulevard of Elvar the Pacifier.  The shops on either side of the boulevard were closed, their owners still waking, as most of their customers; their displays of souvenirs and trinkets for the pilgrims and tourists yet to clutter the sidewalks. After three blocks, two bridges, one for each of the lanes of the boulevard, crossed the canal and continued each into a separate street into the main business district of the city.

The buildings housing the main trading houses of Pinnacle City, which is to say the main ones on Mother, lined the canal on the other side of the canal. Though much significance had been attributed to the fact that the buildings representing the holy and the mundane faced each other along the length of the Boulevard, the fact is that both sets of buildings, the Great Temple and the trading houses had been there since well before the strip of houses in between them had been demolished to open Elvar Blvd.  Back then. the trading houses had been less impressive affairs, with more storage area than offices and goods constantly moving in between the canal and the warehouses.  With the ample views allowed by the boulevard, the mere utilitarian buildings had been either converted or remodeled into the gilded showcases of wealth that decorated the inland end of Elvar Blvd.

Allucio did not cross any of the bridges, instead, he turned left along the canal to get to the pool. A couple of blocks away from the boulevard, the street along the canal was busy with carts loading goods from the barges that now lined the canal. Many of the houses on either side, most of them still closed, were of minor merchants, that had the ground floor for storage with easy access to the canal and living quarters in the upper floors.  Craftsmen had moved into some of those houses with the warehouse floor turned into workshops.  A particularly noisy house was a tavern where both bargemen and cart drivers were having some drinks.  Many of them were insomniacs waiting for their sleeping trading partners to wake up to complete their deliveries or pick cargo. They would be there for a while so Allucio would check on them later, if he failed to get a ride at the pool.

Besides the trade that went on along the various minor canals that entered the city, Pinnacle City had two main ports, the sea-port for the open water vessels and the pool for the inland barges. They were close to each other, connected via a final set of locks that allowed the barges to reach sea-level and enter the sea-port to transfer cargo directly with the ships. Most of the barges, though, would load at the piers of the shipping houses, close to their warehouses, where the goods would be parceled into reasonable consignments the bargemen could deal with, combining goods from overseas, local manufactures and goods that arrived down river via the other canals converging on the pool.

He could have traveled during the night, his mother, now retired, was an insomniac so it would have been fine to stay with her overnight. He could have traveled for free and, if he felt like, even earned some money since extra deckhands were always welcome on the night trips, but the instructions from the benefactor asked him to go during the day.

He got lucky, barely. He was just arriving at the pool when he saw Baludy's barge maneuvering to head back inland. A few more minutes and they would have missed each other. It was Baludy's son, Canlias standing at the bow, who recognized him. A few waves and hand signals amongst all three of them was all that was needed. They had tried to shout but the background noise of the docks made it pointless. Allucio run parallel to Baludy's barge which was approaching the line of barges moored at the docks. Canlias pointed at one of the last barges in the row, one that had the deck empty. Allucio run to that barge and after shouting to the man on deck a fast "good day, passing through," which was all that courtesy demanded in such tight mooring space, he jumped aboard, went across to the other side and, when the bow of Baludy's barge was passing by, he tossed his bag to Canlias who was ready to catch it. Baludy then pushed the tiller towards the shore which got the stern to swipe by the barge were Allucio stood while the bow pointed away from it. Allucio didn't even need to jump, a single step got him on board where he immediately grabbed the handrail on the roof of the cabin. Baludy immediately opened the steam valve and went back to the upstream lane of the canal.

Canlias had left his bag on deck and had remained at the bow. With so much traffic going in all directions within the pool and until they left the city, the largest boats always had someone at the bow keeping an eye on all the small craft that could not be seen from the wheelhouse, back at the stern, specially when the barge was barely half loaded which made it float high over the water. Canlias would stay standing at the bow, watching for possible obstacles, making signals with one hand to his father at the wheelhouse and the boat-hook in his other hand just in case he needed to push the bow away from anything in their way.

Allucio went to the wheelhouse to meet Baludy and thank him for the ride home. They were all from the same town. Canlias was about his same age and when they were boys they often played together when the barge was loading at the pier back at home. It was natural for him to make his first trips as an apprentice deckhand with Baludy. The guild required Allucio to make trips with at least four skippers in different routes to get his rating, otherwise, he might have never left Baludy and Canlias, they were like family.

It was not the time to embrace or talk much, the pool was crowded and admitted no distraction, Allucio knew that very well so he wasn't going to get in the way, a few words would suffice for the time being. He went to the bow to say hi to Canlias, pick up his bag and take it down to the cabin, out of the way. He then went back up on deck and saw the mooring lines lying around on deck. Canlias had had no time to fix them, he had to take his post at the bow as soon as they had departed so Allucio started picking up the fenders and making all the lines fast to their belaying pins, taking care to lie low to avoid blocking Baludy's view from the stern. Just as in the good old days.

By the time he was done, they had left the pool, where the abundant traffic went in any possible direction, and were sailing along the main canal inland, away from the city. The boats crossing people from one shore to the other took care of themselves. They had to slow down whenever they met a canal coming from the side, just as a precaution. Occasionally a faster boat might overtake them by the side and cut across their bow when they met someone coming in the other direction, usually wealthy kids with nothing better to do. Fortunately now the guild took care of protecting their members; in older times, if you sunk one of those boats, their family would bring ruin to your business. Still, they remained a nuisance and you had to spare them to avoid any delays.

Allucio went to the stern and sat on the starboard railing slightly behind Baludy. The weather was fine so the cabin was open all around, only the roof remained held by its four posts, to provide some shade.

"So, I see you remember, Master Allucio," said Baludy, stressing the 'master'.

Allucio looked at his city clothes as if he had just realized he had them on, which was the truth in some way, they weren't the kind of clothes he used to wear when he worked aboard. "Some things you never forget, specially if you had good teachers."

"You are important now, I've heard."

"I am the Keeper of the Calendar," replied Allucio over-stressing the title, "Now I can officially tell you what day it is today, that is, if you care to know."

"Today is the day we go inland soon after daybreak and come back down as soon as we offload what we carry and pick something else to bring to the city. The same as yesterday and any day before that."

"True, the title of Keeper is just tradition and it hasn't made a difference in what I do."

"Which is?"

"Watching Heaven, mostly."

"That's what going with the salt water sailors got you."

Indeed, part of Allucio's apprenticeship required him to do some open-water sailing, away from the canals he knew so well. Navigating far from the sight of land required using the Sun, Heaven and the stars to find your position and heading. Allucio always enjoyed watching the sky but it was that training that put some order, maths and science into his hobby.

With two clearly visible celestial bodies in the sky, sailors at sea had it relatively easy.  With their sextants they measured the height of Heaven and the Sun over the horizon.  The first translated directly to fall by subtracting it from 100 grads. The second, thanks to the nautical almanac giving the position of the sun for each hour and minute within each journey within each day, allowed a circle to be traced which intersected the one for the measured fall in at most two points, one of them a hemisphere apart from their likely position thus implausible. If the chronometer was broken, further calculations and tables were required to get the time of day. It didn't work quite well approaching the midday eclipse, as both Heaven and the Sun were too close to each other, and not at all during the night, with no Sun visible. However, during the midday eclipse, stars were available, as well as during the night, so the almanac provided tables for the most visible stars.

"But I returned to the canals, didn't I?"

"Everyone does. Once you've lived this life, you can't leave it. Look around you!"

Canlias joined them at the wheelhouse since there was no further need to keep a watch at the bow. They were already out of the city on the canal that connected to the river that drained into the sea a few kilometers away from Pinnacle City.

The canal had been dug out of one of the many branches that formed the delta of the Nera. The fields around it were very well irrigated, providing much of the food to the city and almost all its fresh water. The banks of the canal had been raised and held by a double line of deep-rooted trees on either side, which prevented it from changing its course on every seasonal flood, as many of the other branches still did. The towpath on either side was still used as a local road by the farmers and, though the commercial barges all had steam engines, some poor farmer still pulled his own raft with his plow horse, if he had one, or with his own legs, to take whatever little produce he managed to grow into the nearest market town.

The water level was kept artificially high above its natural level by these banks and a series of dams so that it actually reached the city, which was on slightly higher ground than the floodplains around it. This extra height provided those sailing on the canal a very extensive view on the surrounding plain. The canal contoured the hills that limited the sunset side of the delta and when that was not possible, huge volumes of dirt and rocks had been piled up to support the canal and, when even that had not been possible, an aqueduct had been built. They were crossing that aqueduct right now. A small stream crossed below the aqueduct to drain into the Nera, such a small stream that you could have thought it could simply be tamed quite easily. Come the wet season, though, and that small stream became an unstoppable torrent. A century ago, that torrent had breached the canal works and had killed half a dozen people. That's when the engineers changed the design and made an aqueduct instead, allowing the stream to flow freely underneath. The aqueduct was not particularly high, just a single ample arch over the stream and plenty of tall but narrow arches making up the approaches. It was wide enough for two barges to cross in opposite directions. This close to Pinnacle the traffic was large enough to require two lanes. Further out, any such costly piece of infrastructure would have just one lane.

The barge was carrying manufactured goods from the city, a whole assortment of furniture, tools, spare parts and all sort of packages of different sizes and shapes to deliver all along the way. Usually, in the trip downstream to the city the hold would be full of produce or any other raw material from the fields to the city. On the way up, the holds were only half full, but with far more valuable cargo, that's why they were so high in the water. Baludy was well-known and trusted by the shipping houses downstream in Pinnacle City so they gave him a whole assortment of cargo to deliver in each and every town on the way upstream.

It was time to have something to eat. Baludy ordered Canlias to take the tiller while he went down to prepare something. Nothing elaborate, the first set of locks were little more than an hour away. Allucio volunteered to help, but Baludy told him to stay on deck and enjoy the view.

Canlias was happy to hear about Allucio's appointment. It didn't mean much to him except for the part about the larger apartment. Housing was a common concern for people about Canlias age. He had it easier than most. Males could not hold real estate, only mothers could, but Baludy had a floating home in his barge so Canlias could live with either of his parents. Living in the barge provided Canlias with both lodging and income and also chances to look around and be seen. Most young men lived with their mothers until they partnered with a woman, others left for a nearby town or faraway city and lived in rented lodgings. Canlias had more if not better chances. They talked about women for a while, as it was bound to happen to people their age, and their estates or chances of getting one, since they were reaching an age to settle down.

When a woman accepted a partner, she might get a slice of the family estate or her mother might help in buying one somewhere else. The man could not help in that since it would imply some right to that property, which he couldn't have. His part on the deal was the labor, the management or whichever way he could provide for sustenance. However, that was temporary, a childless woman could not hold to property either. A home was for a family and the head of the family was the mother. So, a young couple was bound to have children soon after coming together. That consolidated the status of the woman who then became a mother which allowed her to formally inherit the property from her mother. Fathers, though, were somehow incidental. If a couple split, the children would remain at home with their mother, though the father still retained the obligation to provide for the sustenance of his children. Mothers could take a new partner, and many did. Most couples were stable, but many couples split, the mother's home providing stability to the children. A male widower would have to rely on one of his daughters for lodging since the house he might have lived in for all his adult life could never belong to him. It would reflect very bad on her motherly status if a woman left her father destitute so the arrangement usually worked.

Baludy's barge was in a gray area. It was his home and he actually owned it but since it wasn't fixed to the ground, it was fine for a man to own it. He might have it moored permanently somewhere and that would still be well within the law, but no mother would settle in it. Baludy didn't have a partner at the time, though even when he had one, he still lived in the barge most of the time.

The conversation moved to the economics of each of the female candidates as Baludy came to deck with the food, but it soon changed to whatever crossed their minds since Canlias started feeling uncomfortable about the turn of the conversation.

----

They arrived at the locks and saw there was already another barge waiting to go upstream, which would spare them the waiting. These locks had three set of gates with two intermediate basins. The basins were large enough for two barges at a time. Each passage drained a large volume of water so, since the last rainy season had been below average, the guild had ordered that barges had to go through the locks two at a time, to save on water. Since another barge was already waiting, they could go straight in and across.

The lower lock was already open and the waiting barge started moving into the basin as they saw Baludy's barge arriving. Baludy went straight in. Both Canlias and Allucio dropped the fenders over the sides and had their boat hooks ready, the maneuvering space being quite tight with another barge already in. There was no way to maneuver into the basin without some help, unless you didn't mind banging against everything and everyone around. Each of them caught one of the vertical poles on the walls of the basin with their boat hooks and were soon passing the mooring lines around them. As the basin flooded, the lines would simply slide up along the pole. The lock keeper was already pushing one of the locks closed and another sailor, probably from a barge waiting to go downstream, was pushing the other half on the opposite site of the canal. As soon as both panels of the lock were closed, the lock keeper opened the valve to flood the basin with the water of the next basin upriver. When both basins were at the same level, the lock keeper went to open the next set of locks connecting those basins. The barges then moved to the next basin, one at a time, by pulling and pushing with their boat hooks against the other barge, the sides of the locks and whatever came within reach. Once in it, the process was repeated until they reached the level of the upstream canal. Since Baludy's barge was lighter, they agreed to let him go first since, anyway, he was likely to overtake the other barge in no time.

As they came out, they saw two other barges which had been waiting for the locks to bring the barges up. The guild established the waiting times. With plenty of water, there was no wait, the lock keeper would get each one through immediately. As water turned scarce, barges had to wait for another barge to make a full load. If that waiting time passed and there was no barge in sight, a barge could go through alone.

Some years, the rains failed and the water level fell so much that the locks remained closed and the bargemen had to manhandle their cargo from one side of the locks to the other, each set of barges going back and forth on the segment of canal they got assigned to without crossing the locks. That was hard and slow work, but if the water went any lower, there would be no work at all so they could not afford to let the water spill through.

They made their first delivery in a town a couple of hours upstream of the locks. They left it for pickup at the baker's shop, which was close to the docks, as instructed by the sender. The town was at the meeting point in between the canal and the river that fed it. The river was not navigable further downstream due to some rapids and then its water was lost into a the shallow wetlands below. Fortunately, the same rocky bottom of the rapids provided a good support for a dam that prevented that spillage and kept the canal full.

The waterway continued upstream that river, passing by many towns along its course. The shores of the river had been planted with deep-rooted trees to consolidate its banks and a towpath raised on both shores. Many small locks opened on the sides to feed the irrigation canals that watered the fields along the route. The waterway was no longer straight as the canal was, it varied in direction and width as the original river did. There were just a couple of short artificial cuts on its course, to bypass some meanders. It was easier to cut a new canal than to consolidate the shores of those loops which, left to their own devices, would change course on each seasonal flood. The farmers were also happy to be able to use that newly dry land with its deep crust of rich sediment.

By the next journey they had delivered a quarter of their cargo, since the area was strewn with little towns thanks to its fertile fields. Then it came the hilly country that separated the coastal plains from the inland plateau. The waterway became once again an artificial canal and the locks multiplied as it had to climb the hillsides. After five set of locks they finally reached the basin before the tunnel. Since it was time for a meal they decided to stop. Actually, right about that place, it was always time for a meal. Few cared to stop for a meal while negotiating the five sets of locks so, either after passing through them or before facing them, the bargemen would stop for a meal at the aptly named Bargemen Tavern where everyone would stop to eat and socialize.

The tavern made a brisk business both by day or by night since it never closed. The current owner was not an insomniac as her mother and grand mother, the founder, had been but she partnered with one who kept the business running by night. The tunnel had just one lane so it reversed direction every 30 minutes or so. Barges had to wait anyway and either after or before the hard job of crossing the long line of successive locks, most did not mind skipping one or two shifts. In the dry season if there was no water and the locks were closed, then this was the place to transfer the cargo from the upstream barges to oxcarts or steam trucks that would go up and down the road all the way to the river in the valley below. On those days, the tavern would be crowded with bargemen, young farmhands willing to make some money loading and unloading the goods and farmers driving the carts up and down. Thus, the farmers in this area always made some money, if there was a drought and their crops turned scarce, then they would make their money in haulage. Even the miller, who made charcoal pellets from sawdust and grain husks to sell in the city, instead of paying to get it shipped downstream, would sell it as fuel for the boilers in the steam trucks. Land transport was more expensive than shipping, a barge could carry more than 8 truckloads, but when the locks were closed, it became the only alternative.

After a fine meal and lots of chatting with fellow bargemen, when the bell rung signaling that the upstream shift was 5 minutes away, all those ready to go went to their barges, including Baludy and company who had missed three shifts while relaxing in the tavern. There weren't many barges in the basin and they were old-timers so there wasn't much of a fuss when leaving. Some found another barge moored to theirs on a second or even third row, which made the maneuver a little more complicated, but shouting the name of the barge or the barge owner if they knew who he was, would usually bring them out of the tavern to help. Plenty of loud banter would go back and forth, completely unrelated to the maneuver itself, which was carried fast and competently enough anyway.

The last barge in the downstream shift would carry a wooden ring wrapped in rope that could be easily passed from the moving barge to the gatekeeper at the mouth of the tunnel. That was the signal for the gatekeeper to let the barges into the tunnel. He would then press the button that sounded the buzzer at the other end. One long buzz meant he was letting barges in. There were already three barges ready and eager to go so, as soon as the gatekeeper got the ring and signaled them to get going, they did so one after the other, followed by the rest at short intervals. The gatekeeper would pass the ring to the last barge going in and would prevent any further barges from entering the tunnel. He would then press the button twice to signal the other gatekeeper that he had let the last barge in. The ring was still needed because, though the gatekeeper could signal when he let the last barge in, his fellow gatekeeper at the other end could not know which one was the last when they came out.

The tunnel had a low ceiling and was narrow, without a towpath on the side. In older times, before steam engines, barges would need to be pushed by hand while the draft animals were led by the road, over the same hill, to the far end of the tunnel. The tunnel still had metal hooks on the sides. The bargemen would throw a loop of rope on them, then they would walk towards the stern while holding to those hooks, effectively pushing the boat forward. Once they reached the stern, they would let go of the hook, walk back to the bow, catch the next hook and walk back again. With two bargemen working one on each side and alternating, so that one of them would start when the other was past the middle, the barge could move quite swiftly. All this was hard work since the roof was quite low so, if the deck was high, they had to do this hunched down and often hitting their heads against the roof.

The roof of the tunnel was marked by what seemed to be the rungs of a ladder set horizontally right in the middle. Some bargemen preferred to 'walk' the barge through the tunnel. They would lay on their back on a sort of cot on tall, sturdy legs assembled for the purpose near the bow, face up looking at the roof and with their head towards the bow. They would then raise their feet to touch the roof and walk on those rungs, thus pushing the barge. The cot could be adjusted in height, to be as near the roof as required and it had a couple of padded wooden blocks for the shoulders so the bargeman could push against them as well as a couple of handles to pull. As long as the bargeman walked in the center of the ladder, the barge would simply follow and no steering was needed.

None of that was required any longer, only small boats wouldn't have their own steam engine and those would be towed along the tunnel as a courtesy to those waiting to go on the other direction since unpowered boats might take two or three times as long to get across the tunnel. Wooden poles buried into the bottom protruded above the water on either side to prevent the barges from hitting the rock on the walls of the tunnel but to go along banging into them was considered unprofessional. Canlias and Allucio sat one on each side close to the bow pushing, if needed, with their feet, hands or boat hooks, to keep the barge away from the walls. With their barge being only half loaded and thus floating high, they couldn't but be seated with their feet hanging by the side, only Baludy, taking care of the engine back in the wheelhouse, which was half sunk in the deck, could remain standing.

They came out of the tunnel after a quarter of an hour. Barges had to go slow on the tunnel to avoid stirring up the water since the waves might endanger the barges behind. There was no one waiting to go downstream. If the gatekeeper on this end got the ring and, after a while, didn't have any barges going down and couldn't see any coming towards the tunnel, he would signal his partner at the other side by sending him three short buzzes which the other would acknowledge with three buzzes. That meant the tunnel was free to go either way. If any of them got any barges, he would warn the other with four buzzes grouped into two pairs, which the other would acknowledge with just one short buzz. Sometimes, they would spend hours sending three buzzes back and forth every half hour or so, just to check that the system worked and that they were at their posts.
