# 7 - The Trip to the Island

Jobas and Marlo had a three-hour hike ahead of them. Instead of going along the river that passed by Ponju, they went across the hills to the next valley. The area was hilly country with valleys running parallel to each other, carved by rivers, all draining into the same major ones and then to the sea. Some were navigable, others were too small or too steep, but they still provided irrigation to the farmers on its shores. The next valley was served by a small stream with a winding and narrow road connecting the sparse population along its way. Hikers were a usual sight so Jobas and Marlo would simply be one more such group. They would wait for the same trucker who had brought them there to pick them up on his return trip. They hadn't set a precise time, the trucker had regular customers on the way so he was sure to return with a good load, but he didn't know how long would it take to collect it all. They set camp to wait for him at the agreed spot. The trucker was going to leave them a note should he pass by and not find them, but there was no note when they arrived at the meeting point so there was nothing else to do but wait.

Jobas enjoyed hiking more than Marlo did. Neither had much of a chance in Heaven were nobody stayed outdoors more than their air supply could last. The atmosphere of Heaven had a pressure and a temperature quite like those on Mother, the difference was the relative lack of oxygen and the excess of carbon dioxide in it. You had to have a breathing apparatus and wear a mask whenever you went outdoors. Overalls were worn mostly to keep the dust out of the habitable areas and to preserve your own clothes but, weather permitting, you could go naked. The patches of stunted native vegetation had not fixed the soil as it had on Mother so there could be a lot of dust in the atmosphere, and if the wind blew, it was hard on the skin and dangerous to the eyes, so the breathing masks covered the whole face, including the eyes. As most people on Heaven, Jobas had hardly ever seen the sky or felt the outside world with his own senses with no protection in between.

Smells were something he enjoyed. The variety of vegetation on Mother gave it an amazing range of smells, not that he liked all of them, but admittedly there were very many and they also changed with the seasons, something that didn't happen with the canned air on Heaven. He also liked fire. They couldn't light a fire outdoors on Heaven due to the lack of oxygen on the atmosphere nor in enclosed spaces, for security reasons. Neither Marlo nor himself were insomniacs so they didn't need a fire to light the night, which would be an expensive proposition anyway considering how long it lasted, and they didn't need to cook much, but Jobas felt that a campfire was part of the experience of camping outdoors so he collected some wood and lighted one when they arrived at the pick up site.

They had an easy time waiting for the trucker, just a couple of meals and there he was. In the cabin, they talked about what regular hikers ought to talk about, or at least what Jobas thought they would. He had to hide his excitement from the many things he still found surprising in Mother. He pretended to be some sort of an artist so that his blunders could be attributed to eccentricity. Marlo was not very talkative anyway so he didn't have that much of a problem.

They crossed the main railway line after a couple of meals, still before midday. The trucker had some cargo to drop at the station and would continue further on to deliver the rest. They paid him for their transportation, said goodbye and wished good luck to each other. They didn't have to wait long for the train going to the sunrise coast. They sent a telegram so they would be picked up at the destination and barely had time to take some refreshments before the train arrived. It took a further 8 hours of travel, with several short stops and a long one to refill the tender with water and fuel for the locomotive. The station was well equipped with a big dining place always ready with a hot meal when the passengers arrived. Finally, they arrived at their destination, a small station serving a farming town.

The truck from the Farm was waiting for them. They simply called it that way, the Farm. It was owned by a family whose members had left the town and had lived in the city for a long time. The neighbors didn't know how many sisters there were or which city or cities they had gone to since they had been out of town for two generations. The current tenants were a commune of farmers who worked the fields. The big house of the great grand mother also had rooms to rent to travelers which wished to take a vacation there. At least, that was the story the people in town knew. The truth was that the younger members of the family had sold the Farm long ago and was now owned by several other women with faked documents most of whom had returned to Heaven long ago. The guest house was not actually open to any travelers and was far enough to discourage casual visitors, but it served as a good excuse for the town people who saw strangers come and go without calling any attention. Some houses in the town caught on the idea and they also took guests which helped to bring more visitors to the place and thus make it easy to conceal the comings and goings of their own people. A town by a canal, equally far to the other side of the rail line provided an alternate route and allowed them to further disguise the number of people coming and going and, finally, the Farm reached the coast and had its own pier.

Jobas and Marlo arrived at the station with their camping gear looking as any tourist and were picked by the truck driver of the Farm just as any guests would be expected to be picked up. They had used that same route a few times before so they were greeted as returning guests. It was the problem with small towns, there was bound to be bored onlookers who knew everybody in town, so there was always the need to keep up the appearances. It took a further hour to reach the guest house where each settled in the rooms they had called home for these past two years. Both had finished their assigned duties in Mother and were waiting for their return trip when this new mission, to contact Allucio, came up and they volunteered for it. Now it was finished and they only had to send a report and they would be free until dusk. There was no need to rush to send it to Heaven since it was night-time there so they showered, changed to their own clothes, had a meal and took a long nap.

As they woke up they went to the communications room to type their reports for later transmission. They could do audio and even visual communications, but brief digital transmissions were the preferred method. Technology was not completely unknown in Mother and, though radio communication had not been openly re-discovered in their post-collapse somewhat technophobic society, there were a few enthusiasts that were tinkering with their own radio equipment and would eventually pick any signal if it lasted long enough, so transmissions were done at random intervals in short bursts as focused as possible.

They would not be leaving until the night and the midday eclipse had just passed so there was a full half day ahead. They returned to helping in the everyday chores of the farm. Marlo was more technically oriented, so he went to the bunkers below ground to help with the communications equipment and other hardware. Jobas went outside to help with the farm animals.

The Farm was not just a safe house for their own people coming in and out. It was a valuable business; after all, transporting stuff to Heaven was expensive and they needed plenty of local resources.

One of the heaviest loads shipped on a regular basis to Heaven was topsoil. Until the agricultural land on Heaven could spread significantly beyond its current size, the ecosystem was unstable as many of the microorganisms and even the worms that turned and kept the soil fertile simply died and had to be replenished. The post-war colony, when they were cut-off from Mother by the Great Collapse, survived on hydroponics and other artificial cultivation methods, but many suffered and even died from lack of nutrients and many children were stunted. The average height of the population decreased markedly in those first generations. Some of the foodstuffs that were needed for a better diet couldn't adapt to artificial cultivation methods so topsoil was needed to grow them in.

Pharmaceuticals was a far lighter load but a very important one. Many medicines were extracted from plants and Heaven didn't have such a variety of plants to extract the basic ingredients from. Other medicines such as vaccines are obtained by infecting animals and later extracting the antibodies the animals themselves produce. Heaven couldn't afford keeping animals for that purpose since food was already a major issue, but most important, in Heaven's closed environment, all living close together under the domes, breathing the same air, keeping infected animals was a big risk. Here in the Farm, animal feed was abundant and the ample open space provided a natural barrier against the spread of decease should anything fail in the primary containment.

Pharmaceuticals also provided income since they were sold in Mother. Through obscure ownership structures, Heaven controlled three supposedly independent pharmaceutical companies. Most medicines produced by these companies had simply been taken from the records that Heaven had been able to keep through the Collapse. Selecting which medicines to produce had caused great angst in the first decades since it was impossible to suddenly come up with all the wealth of drugs they knew about, first because they could not produce them all at once, factories take time to build, and mostly because it would have been quite suspicious if all of them were 'discovered' at once. They did their best and they saved lots of lives, but they knew many lives were also lost for lack of medicines they could not admit having or were yet unable to produce in quantities large enough.

Heaven was almost self-sufficient but those little extra things it needed were expensive to transport so it needed something to sell in Mother and the best resource they had was the knowledge and the technology they had preserved since before the War, but they could only produce and sell that which would not betray its origin. Thus, they owned a couple of manufacturers of paints. The somewhat sophisticated chemistry that went into producing the whitest white in Mother was not so much the result of any process done on the tons of white chalk they bought from local suppliers and made the bulk of the solids in the paint, but the few grams of additives that gave it the edge over that of any other manufacturer. Likewise, they bought tons of reddish, blueish, greenish stuff and other natural sources of pigments to cover up for the chemicals that really gave them those unbeatable hues and the many other properties that made them a success.

In general, chemical components had proved to be the ones most easily disguised in final products, the ones that were of a technological level compatible with that on Mother, just a little bit above, but not enough to stand out.

---

Jobas went to take care of the farm animals, which provided the manure to feed the little organisms that enriched the topsoil, provided an income through its sale, and disguised those other animals used to develop vaccines and other pharmaceuticals. Jobas wanted to enjoy the open fields, the last time he would be able to for quite a long time, perhaps for life. Those animals were not infected, they were not the ones raised for vaccines, he would have to be quarantined and miss the return trip if he even approached the infected ones. All the sections with animals were visited regularly so he joined the party about to leave. The truck carried salt blocks the animals would lick when they needed some minerals, grain to let them gain a little extra weight before sending them to the market and tools to fix fences, the water troughs and whatever else they found broken. They also had to bring a pregnant cow to take better care of it and its litter in the barn.

On their way, they found a tree had fallen on a drainage canal and its branches caught enough floating debris in the last rain to block its flow. The tree was in an odd position which prevented them to just pull it out with the truck without damaging the banks of the canal. Jobas volunteered for the clearance job along another of the regular crew and they were left behind, to be picked up on the return trip, with shovels, axes, saws and ropes. Hopefully, they could either clear it all by themselves or at least break it in such a way that the truck would be able to pull the parts away. Later on, they would have to come back and plant a new young tree, as it was their roots that kept the banks of the canal stable.

At the end of the day, after several such trips, several meals in the fields and others in the common quarters where he had a chance to meet face to face with people he might not see for a long time, he was happy and tired. Along with Marlo whom he had barely seen in the last hours, they prepared their luggage for the trip back to Heaven before the last meal, where they got a nice and somewhat bawdy farewell speech. Then, they left for the boat.

During the day, the boat would be used for the regular business of the farm. During the night, it would go back and forth to the launch facility, the Island, as they called it, though in fact it was in the coast of one of the three big landmasses in the uninhabited hemisphere. This particular place was a salient that extended over to the Heaven-side hemisphere. Both Marlo and Jobas were sleepers so they had to get on board before drowsiness overwhelmed them, otherwise they would have to be carried, and there were not that many insomniacs amongst them, just as there weren't that many in the regular population. Obviously the skipper and his deckhand were insomniacs and they were often seen prodding their passengers to get on board while they could still walk and threatening to leave them behind if they fell asleep, something everyone knew had never happened. After all, they would have to haul the 'packages' as the sleeping passengers were often referred to, when they reached the Island.

Both were wearing travel overalls, which included a harness with handles to help in moving their limp bodies around. They didn't carry much with them. They had already sent some personal items in previous cargo trips and they left some to be sent whenever a little extra space was left over in future cargo trips. They didn't carry much clothing, the materials, needs and fashion of Heaven and Mother were different and though after two years they were both used to Mother clothing, they knew they would feel much more comfortable, physically and psychologically with their regular Heaven clothes. Once again, they would have to blend with the locals only this time it would be their own.

One of the crew, Anisia, had been in a nearby hill with a good view of the sea, to make sure they had no other craft that could see them depart or which way they were going. She was not part of the permanent crew, she only sailed when there was any special cargo, such as passengers. By sundown, when there was not enough light to see anything, she climbed down, went to the boat and after reporting to the skipper in the wheelhouse, she went to the cabin to find the packages laying on their cots and her crew-mate fixing something to eat, still talking to them though by this time they had their eyes closed and Marlo was barely able to grumble some noises while Jobas was clearly gone for the night.

They usually carried sleepers in the main cabin because it was easier to unload them than if they put them in the cabins down below. Insomniacs were used to have sleepers just laying around since most grew up in homes where some family members were sleepers and some weren't. The reverse was not true, some sleepers felt exposed and vulnerable when left in the same room with insomniacs but then, they couldn't do much about it since they couldn't avoid falling asleep. The memories of the rogue bands of insomniacs pillaging during the night was still present in old legends which everyone had heard, and many more had suffered childish pranks from their bored, insomniac siblings. Other sleepers didn't mind at all; traveling long distances during the night in a river barge was the cheapest way around Mother. In Heaven there was no prejudice about insomniacs, quite the opposite, the insomniacs were the ones who took care of maintaining the life support systems running during the night.

They sailed after the meal, by then, the local sleepers would be hibernating so there wouldn't be anyone watching them go. They could not be sure an insomniac would not be watching them, but the idea was to avoid detection as much as possible, there was no way to guarantee nobody would ever see them, after all, there was nothing wrong with sailing during the night. Most of their precautions were to avoid uncomfortable inquiries or rumors that might point to where the real secrets lay.

The trip was an easy one. The sea was calm and they settled on an easy routine once the predictable squall that usually came after sunset, when the cold air of the coming night met the warm day air, had passed. The night got brighter as Heaven turned full and only the brightest stars could be seen. Heaven was low on the horizon when, after five journeys, they arrived at their destination. The dock was in an unremarkable cove in a rough coastline. It had been a military outpost built during the War and it was in a bad state of repair, or so it looked. The approach was marked by the foam produced by the surf hitting submerged rocks, which ensured nobody bothered to land there. In fact, the bottom had been dredged and if you knew where the canal had been dug, it was very safe and deep.

There were no insomniacs there so there would be no ground crew to help them. The boat docked and Anisia immediately disembarked and started up the road inland to the shed where the truck was kept. The skipper and the mate would open the hold and get the cargo ready for unloading. Anisia backed the truck over the dock to have the flatbed closer to the boat. She put the brake, started the pump to get hydraulic pressure and stepped out. The truck had a built-in mechanical arm to help with the cargo. No permanent working structures were ever left in the open, visible from the sea, the old crane was rusty and falling down. She extended the extra support legs and unfolded the arm. There was cargo already in the truck that had to be sent back to the Farm and still more in the shed. There were more pallets in the boat than the truck could carry in one trip so they had to juggle all those pallets in between the boat, the pier and the shed, which took quite some time. Being done with the cargo, it was time for the sleepers. The sleeper cabin could hold up to three stretchers so they took two of them and carried them to the boat cabin. They moved Jobas and Marlo from their cots to the stretchers and carried them up to the deck. Then, with the same crane they had used with the cargo, they raised them and slid them into the sleeper cabin in the truck.

Anisia would remain in the Island until the next night when she would return to the Farm with two or three new 'packages' just arrived from Heaven. They shared a last meal together and after a short nap, she disembarked and saw the boat leave. At that point, for all she new, she was the only person awake in that whole continent. There was nobody awake in the base, otherwise he or she would have come and helped them. The continent never had any significant population in a few seaside settlements and had been uninhabited since the war. It was arid, except for a narrow strip along the coast where the sea mist provided some moisture for the tough vegetation that lived there. A few kilometers inland, though, there was nothing but dry desert. Mother had never suffered overpopulation and the War certainly cut off any tendency in that direction. Sleepers made no good open-sea sailors since they had to land somewhere to spend the night so, with no need and no means, the far-side continents were left alone. Besides, the inhabitants of Mother liked seeing Heaven up there in the sky, which was evident in the distribution of the population, the density fell off the further away you went from Pinnacle. Why, then, would they bother with a continent where they couldn't see Heaven at all or, as in the Island, it was barely showing above the horizon?

Anisia, like anyone from Heaven also had a good reason to have Heaven visible when on Mother, Heaven was her home. There was also a practical reason, so that the island could have direct radio communication without resorting to relaying satellites, which provided a good excuse for those that suffered nostalgia.

She drove to the base inland. The road looked awful, as it should, though it had been leveled off and compacted to provide a very soft ride, even if you wouldn't know that from the looks of it. She carried the most valuable cargo, the medicines and the passengers, and refrigerated material that needed to be put in cold storage as soon as possible. The six pallets left behind in the shed contained topsoil and any other cargo that didn't require any special handling.

The base was in a wide valley about two hours ride from the coast. It was on the edge of the desert but there was abundant, though a little brackish, underground water right below the surface. The valley was covered with that kind of grayish green bushes that can live on such water. There had been no attempt to hide the buildings in the valley. The chance that they would be seen was so low that it would have been a pointless effort. If aviation was ever redeveloped in Mother, they would eventually be in trouble, but decades would pass until someone dared cross the ocean and reach and explore the far-side continents, so there would be plenty of time to do something about it. For the time being, the distance and the isolation were enough barriers. The buildings were even painted in bright colors, after all, they owned the major paint manufacturers in Mother.

Anisia drove to the main storage building. She opened the loading bay and backed into it. The two pallets requiring cold storage had been placed in the back. Anisia took the pallet jack and pulled them out of the truck and straight into the cold. The other two pallets could wait in the truck, but they were in the way to reach the sleeper cabin so she had to pull them out of the truck and set them on the side. Only then was she able to reach for the sleeper cabin. She slid the pallet jack under it and slowly moved it out of the truck and placed it into its wheeled base that was more suitable to use in the living quarters. She checked on Jobas and Marlo even though, in the poor light she had there, she knew she couldn't tell if they were hibernating or dead. She wheeled them out of the storage building and into the guest living quarters. There was a room ready for them, with beds available, but it would be too hard and even risky for Anisia to try to move them with no help. The stretchers were well padded and were meant for a sleeper to rest there for the whole night so that's where they would remain. She just took the side and top panels off so they wouldn't feel caged when they woke up.

She went to the main offices building and into the communications room to send a message reporting their arrival. A bunch of notes with instructions, news and welcomes were waiting for her in the notice board. While she was reading them, a bell in the communications room signaled an incoming message. She went to pick it up, but it was just an acknowledgement of her own message and a welcome note. The instructions for her had nothing special either, just the routine work of doing the rounds, checking the equipment and so on. There was no one sick in the infirmary so that was one less thing to be concerned about. She took the notes and left for her room. It was the only room with the heating on, after all, that was what hibernating was all about, saving resources, but she wasn't hibernating and the cold of the night had already crept into most of the building. She took a shower and changed into more comfortable clothes and read the rest of the notes while laying on her bed. A few people had asked her to check on their pet plants so she went to the kitchen, filled a pot with water, and went to the apartments of those with plants. It was a pointless thing to do, after all, the island had no permanent insomniac on site to water the plants so, if they had survived so many nights without anyone taking care of them, they would survive one more without her assistance, but they were pet plants, more pets than plants, and their owners, her friends, would appreciate her doing that. She went back to the kitchen to return the pot and fixed herself something to eat. Finally, after such a long day, she went to her room to have a long nap, a very long nap.
