# 9 - Anisia is Free

"Good day, Anisia. Thanks for coming, please have a seat."

"Good day, Anric, thanks. You wanted to see me."

Anric was the general manager at the Farm thus Heaven's highest resident official on Mother, its consul so to speak, if there were any diplomatic ties. Anisia had returned from the Island with the newcomers from Heaven and was told to check with Anric as soon as she finished with her charges.

"Yes, your probation time is almost over and I have received information that a new town is being opened for repopulating and I wanted to know if you might be interested in moving to it so we could speed up your papers in time for submission."

"A new town? I didn't know there were such things."

"Well, it doesn't happen too often. The population is not growing much so there should be no need for additional housing, but people are moving around so some places are getting crowded and some are being depopulated. The remote places are being abandoned, young women want to be near or in urban centers and many are selling or abandoning their inherited properties. If they have a degree, being a farming landowner is not attractive, nor is marrying a farm boy."

"I see, so cities are getting crowded," added Anisia.

"Not yet crowded, but the price of houses in the cities is growing and almost out of reach for many women. So, the Council is either expanding the cities with new neighborhoods or, every once in a while, creating a completely new town."

"But why do they call it repopulating if it is new?"

"I understand they call it that way because they set them up where ancient towns or cities once existed, though nobody has lived there for centuries. It seems that the existence of a previous history or ruins of an old city provide some sort of emotional attachment for the new population, even if it is not their history or their ruins."

"I cannot imagine that bombed out ruins reminding you of the Great War can bring positive feelings."

"Neither the Council of Mothers nor the Priesthood want the Great War to be completely forgotten. The structure of their society is a direct consequence of that and the Reconstruction that Elvar the Pacifier started. Subtle reminders of how bad things had been prove how good things are now. And I agree, up to a point. People should never forget that war is bad, however, insisting that their solution, the society and culture they had developed in response to the Great Collapse is the only possible solution can only lead to stagnation. They had been admirably flexible so far and their society is still quite dynamic, but I fear for the future, though that is a long time away."

"Anyway, back to you, Anisia. I was going to suggest that you meet our relocation expert at Port Saltim and, if you wish, visit this new town. You have traveled in Mother more than once so you should know your way around. This time you would have to go alone, I don't have anyone available to send anywhere on any business right now."

"But I am not allowed to travel alone," replied Anisia.

"As I said, your probation time is almost up and, since the opportunity is now, I have requested permission for you to be allowed to go unsupervised. The judge has agreed as long as you report your whereabouts regularly and stick to the travel plan, or check with us about any changes."

Anisia was silent for a while. It wasn't yet freedom but it was a taste of it that had come earlier, quite unexpectedly, and it meant a lot to her.

"Anisia," Anric called, seeing Anisia was a little overwhelmed, "I don't need a reply from you right now about this new town. You were due to meet our relocation expert in three days anyway, we are just moving that appointment a little earlier. He knows much more about this new town than we do so you can ask him all you want and then decide to visit the place or not and apply for a property there or not. Otherwise we can carry on with our more standard path to your insertion into Mother society. I would suggest you prepare to leave after the next meal or, at most, the one after. Do you want to do that?"

"Yes, Anric," replied Anisia still a little affected by the future opening in front of her, "thank you. I can be ready in no time."

"Check with Chus for him to drive you to the train station. He knows the timetables and can give you all the information about the trip. I can only wish you a nice trip," said Anric, standing up and extending his hand, "By the way, don't do what I've just done. Men don't usually shake hands with women in Mother, sorry," added with a smile.

----

Anisia knew her probation was up in six more days and, she expected, she would then be free. Sort of. She could not return to Heaven, she had been exiled.

As a chemist, she had synthesized some hallucinogen for her own use, which was bad enough, but then she was on a field trip to take and test some soil samples on a new field they planed on opening for cultivation when an emergency happened. She was out in the open just having taken a dose and, possibly due to the higher oxygen content of the respirator or just the excitement of being out, started having a bad trip. She was talking about birds flying and wanting to run after them and catch one. There were no flying birds in Heaven, only flightless poultry, the only birds she could have ever seen flying was in movies from Mother. Her partner, at the mobile lab had to go out to bring her back. Before leaving the roving lab, a fully equipped vehicle with artificial atmosphere that could hold up to 4 people for a full day, the rules required him to report it to traffic control who started monitoring their communications to send further help if required. By the time he reached her, she had already taken her goggles out, her breathing mask was askew and she was fumbling with the zipper of her protective suit.

Even if her partner had not reported her, her senseless babbling could not go unnoticed. Medics were waiting to take her to the hospital when they parked the mobile lab back in the garage at home and a health and safety official was already there to talk to her when the physician released her. Anisia, just as anyone else in Heaven, was valuable to the society. She could not be allowed to endanger herself or, as it might have happened in that trip, her partner; or anyone else since, after all, Heaven was a very unforgiving place. Even after centuries of living there, they were bound to the domes with their breathable air, they could not forget that their existence relied on too many little, fragile things that could easily cascade into a catastrophe if any of them failed. She had failed and needed mending.

She was restricted to remain within the dome and ordered to do counseling. She could not work in the lab on her own, she had to be supervised at all times. Since she was an insomniac, the nights proved to be an issue. Unfortunately there was no other insomniac in their lab and it wasn't deemed good for her to move to another city. During the nights, she had to work with a maintenance crew. The therapist said it would do her good to do some manual job.

With a population of less than a hundred thousand in the whole planet, this was a typical resolution for a case such as hers. Judges, who were older people usually retired from more physically demanding tasks, were nominated for the position and then approved by voting, were more like wise elders than professionals properly trained in the law. They did their best with the resources available. In Heaven, they couldn't afford a jail, a jailer and an idle person jailed, every pair of hands was valuable. Every inhabitant was already doing community service, they wouldn't survive otherwise. So, every case required a special solution though, over the years, precedents had developed so they didn't need to reinvent the wheel every single time. Consultations amongst the judges in the several colonies was frequent and for the worst offenses, sentence was pronounced by committee.

She had not been the first one to try drugs, but she went too far and, as she realized in therapy, she had been doing it for longer and in larger doses than she thought. It was not a matter of detoxification, the drug she had synthesized was not physiologically addictive, but it provided something her mind needed, the illusion of open space, the kind Heaven's wastelands could hardly give her, much less now that she was not cleared to leave the dome. The foreman in her maintenance crew, who was a highly qualified physicist during the day and had always been a tinkerer in his free time, started doing nighttime maintenance as therapy years ago and was always ready with some piece of advice. It was him that came with the idea of going to Mother, after all, for decades now, there had been a constant, if small, flow of emigrants to Mother. She could be one of them.

The alternatives were not good. She could have remained in Heaven but under supervision for many years to come. Her therapist might eventually pronounce her fit, but she would still be emotionally fragile. Even with her outdoors clearance restored, the kind of outdoors available in Heaven might not be enough for her.

She talked about it with her therapist. During their sessions, she had discovered she had a longing for Mother she wasn't quite aware of. The councilor wasn't sure, he said they all had that longing to some degree, perhaps it was in the genes or some cultural memory, after all, Mother was their common ancestral home, but he agreed to explore it. Later, they met with the judge supervising her case. They agreed that she could train and test for duty on Mother. She had to move to another city for that.

The training went through all, the good and the bad. Life on Mother was not idyllic, it was a different culture and a society that was somehow rigid, they didn't have physical barriers such as domes and airlocks but cultural rules and taboos instead. She barely passed the first round of tests. When she returned home for the first break, her councilor found her happier and motivated. They talked a lot about Mother. The councilor was no expert on Mother but he called a colleague of his in the training facility to discuss her case. Overall, it seemed she would be able to adapt.

They had three sessions ahead of them before meeting with the judge to decide whether she could continue the training or not, when the councilor dropped the bomb. If she decided to go ahead, she would not just go to Mother, she would have to emigrate. Emigrants could come back, but that was rare and, in her case, she would not be allowed to do that for several years.

The judge approved further training. Unexpectedly, her performance improved, it seemed the prospect of living permanently in Mother helped her. Her language skills were quite good. The language was the same in both worlds, but the two branches have veered slightly apart, specially the informal everyday expressions. Long ago Heaven's linguists had found a relatively remote region of Mother where the locals had an accent quite like that spoken on Heaven. That allowed Heaven's agents in Mother to claim as coming from that region though, of course, prevented them to actually go to that region where their pretense would be discovered. Also, it meant they had to be able to respond in the dialect of the region should they meet a countryman. Fortunately, though everyone knew some dialect, many families didn't use it at all at home. They were also supposed to have arrived young as emigrants with their families so they were excused from knowing too much about the home country. In other words, they were able to claim they didn't belong neither here nor there, which was truer than the people of Mother could ever imagine.

In the end, she accepted the deal. She would go to Mother on something close to a one-way ticket. She would be on probation for no less than a year, quite possibly two and then she would be inserted into Mother society. During that time, she might be restricted to Heaven's facilities in Mother -the Farm and the Island, though she didn't know much of those places at the time- but her therapist believed she would adapt and be fine to merge into Mother when the time came.

She got scheduled for a flight to Mother. Being an insomniac, she had to travel alone since the life support system of the capsule could support either up to three sleepers hibernating or one insomniac. Not all of the extra space freed by the missing passengers was taken with food and water but an insomniac also needed space to move about during the flight. Sleepers, on the other hand, might as well be packed like sardines and they wouldn't notice. She started training for the specific job she would have at the Farm. While on probation she was to be supervised day and night and there were no residing insomniacs at the Island so she could not remain there, she had to go to the Farm.

She was given some time to settle her personal matters in Heaven before departing. Her father had died, she was estranged from her mother and, as she realized during her therapy sessions, she didn't have that many close friends. Of course everyone knew everyone else in such close quarters but that only makes it hard to realize how lonely you can be. She didn't need to take the medication to start adjusting her day/night cycle since, being an insomniac, she never hibernated anyway. And so, she left Heaven.

-------------

Life at Mother had been wonderful and scary at the same time. Initially, she hated insects and how dirt got into the living spaces. Sometimes she froze for an instant before opening a door to the outside until her conscious mind told her that she didn't need a respirator and once or twice she woke up from a nap after having a nightmare where the normal scenery of Mother suddenly switched to that of Heaven and she couldn't breath.

On the other hand, she found herself walking and often running in the open. As most people on Heaven, she was not a good runner, in fact, it took a while for her body to get used to the distances and the roughness of the terrain. Trips outdoors in Heaven were short and carefully planned and running was basically banned, extreme caution was the norm. She didn't have the legs to travel the distances frequent on Mother. She found herself craving for beef, which she initially shunned since it was mostly unknown in Heaven, as her body started asking for more protein to build muscle. The range of tasks she got assigned to increased as people started to trust her. Eventually she was offered to go to the Island with the night crew. She made several trips returning in the same trip since she was not allowed to remain there.

An unfortunate accident in the Island required someone to stay during the night to take care of one of the victims who could not be moved to the Farm. It was just a journey before nighttime. Whoever they sent had to leave soon to reach the Island before everyone there fell asleep. The physicians both at the Farm and at the Island were sleepers. One of the medics at the Island volunteered to take the medication used to adjust the day/night cycle of people traveling in between the planets, but that only gave some extra hours and then he would also have to be monitored. Their best person at the Farm was away on a mission, too far away to return on time. As it turned out, Anisia seemed to be their second best option amongst the few insomniacs available since she got excellent grades at the medical training she had opted to get in preparation to her travel to Mother. They wanted to contact the physician who had trained her to confirm that her skills were good enough but since the day and night cycles were opposed in between Heaven and Mother, he was still asleep.

Finally, the decision was taken and Anisia would be sent to the Island. The physician at the Farm would go along to prepare her as much as possible while on their trip and would return, asleep, with the boat. A physician on Heaven would take over via radio when they awoke. The night crew of the boat would not be able to stay at the Island. Since they had to depart before their usual time after nightfall, the boat was not fully loaded and they couldn't wait for the rest of the cargo. They would have to make an extra trip that night or they might not be able to launch the next cargo rocket otherwise. Anisia would have to be left alone.

Her medical training had been mostly first aid and emergencies, not continued care and not unsupervised. The doctor took a set of whatever he though she might need, including the vital signs monitor she might have to operate plus some manuals of other equipment she might have to use so, at least, she saw the pictures and knew their names. To the consternation of the crew, their meals in that trip were vegetarian since every piece of meat on board got injected, cut and sewn over and over again. When they arrived to the island, a car was waiting for her at the dock. She took the wheel since the driver that came to pick her up might start getting drowsy halfway back. The doctor remained at the boat since he would also soon fall asleep. The crew stayed at the dock shuffling the little cargo they've got in between the shed and the boat and getting ready to depart for their extra trip that night.

When she arrived at the infirmary, she heard the shouts of the medic calling her from inside. He had the drip with the drugs to keep him awake in his arm so he couldn't move much around. He reported all she needed to know. He let her change the bandages and check the wounds so she could get familiar with her charge while he could still help her. They already had the main radio patched to the intercom at the room so they got the call from the physician who had trained Anisia as soon as he woke up. He asked Anisia to describe the problem to him as she had done in their training. The medic confirmed her description. All this was just for Anisia and the doctor to get in sync since an insomniac physician in Heaven had already been briefed by the one at the Island before he fell asleep.

The medic was getting drowsy so he laid down and asked Anisia to change his drip, which had the medication that had kept him artificially awake, for the one he had prepared with the neutralizing drug. She would have to check that drip during the next hours and take the needle off his arm when it was finished. She also had to attach the vital signs monitor to make sure he was entering hibernation properly. Then she remembered the guy who had gone to pick her up who she had left tied with the safety belt in the car. Fortunately the guy was not heavy and, with the practice that most insomniacs get from dealing with their sleeper relatives and friends, she managed to slide him into a stretcher and from there into a spare bed in the infirmary, along the other guy involved in the accident, who had just a few bruises and was out of danger, though he was plugged into a monitor just in case.

Fortunately it all went fine. After a couple of changes of bandages, it was clear that no infection was to come. The monitors showed both her charges were doing fine. Likewise the guy in the other room. She took out the drip of the medic once his vital signs stabilized and changed the one for the wounded when it was emptied, which took a long time since the heart does not pump it around fast enough and you cannot flood him with liquid in the arm. She remained in the infirmary most of the time and she slept the first two naps in a coach in the same room but, as the wounded became safely out of danger, she was able to fix herself better meals and sleep longer naps in a decent bed. She started getting messages from people in Heaven, where it was daytime, asking her to check this or that and doing some simple maintenance. Unlike the domes in Heaven, the Island didn't have any vital life-support machinery to keep everyone alive, people could simply breath the air that was everywhere, inside and outside and, if provided with enough blankets, could do without heating so maintenance was not vital. Anyway, Anisia enjoyed having something to do while awake during the night.

Just past the midnight eclipse she heard a klaxon and the noise of the truck. The boat had made the second trip and the deckhand drove from the dock to bring the perishables. They had called before departing the Farm to see if she needed something so she was expecting him. Some company was always welcome and he was not only good company but a great cook as well, but he couldn't stay long. The captain was waiting on the boat and they had to go back to the Farm.

As the day approached and the sleepers started to come out of hibernation, she had to keep a sharper eye on the wounded man and report the readings of the monitor to the physician at Heaven more often. As he recovered consciousness, he would have to be sedated if he felt pain and as his heart started pumping with more energy and frequency, she had to check for the effects of bleeding or blood clots. All his medication had to be adjusted to the rising metabolism. This she did as instructed from Heaven based on the readings and tests she reported. A couple of early risers had come asking if everything was Ok and if she needed help, but they left when she said that all was fine. The last one said that she had checked on the physician and said his cheeks were getting rosier so she expected he would be about in an hour or so. Finally, the doctor arrived and took over after receiving her report.

She went to the kitchen since she knew the sleepers would want to have breakfast, but caring the wounded man had took all her time in those few hours and the place was in full swing when she arrived. One of those who had checked on her earlier on in the infirmary raised to meet her, asked her name and shouted an introduction to everyone at the cafeteria. Greetings were mixed with questions about the state of the wounded man which was followed by cheers, thank yous and applause as she told them he was doing fine.

By the second breakfast she got a message from Anric, the manager at the Farm. Before going to sleep for the night, he had sent a memo to the authorities in Heaven that he had been responsible for ordering Anisia to go to the Island and remain there unsupervised against the terms of her probation. He also requested that her status be reviewed and that she be allowed to remain unsupervised for the remaining time of her probation as she had not shown any sign of relapse proving herself trustworthy and able. This reached the judge handling her case while she was tending to the injured during the night and, in consultation with her therapist, they checked all the reports on her, talked to the physician guiding her in treating the patient and they produced a positive report backing the recommendation from Anric. She had not seemed interested in drugs and, during her night watch in the Island, she had access to absolutely everything in the pharmacy and she didn't show any sign of having taken anything. The judge ordered her terms of probation to be changed if a discreet inventory of said pharmacy didn't show anything missing. Anric got the memo with the new terms amongst all the papers that usually piled up in his inbox during his sleep and, after asking the doctor at the Island to do the requested inventory and getting a positive reply, wrote to Anisia with the good news.

---

Chus drove her to the train station and bought the tickets for her. She had already traveled away from the Farm, but never alone. She was a little scared and excited. The problem with traveling alone is that someone equally alone might try to strike a conversation with you, something that rarely happened when two people were traveling together. She knew the cover history for the Farm and she even had the brochures promoting its services. And she had the book she was reading at hand. Opening a book was always a good shield against small talkers. She had only one connection which gave her time to have lunch at the cafeteria in the station. It didn't take much longer to reach Port Saltim. An assistant from Mr Parelta's office was waiting for her at the station with her assumed name on a small board. She had been forewarned not to confide in the assistant since he was a local, unaware of his employer's other line of business.

As a lawyer specialized in inheritance and wealth management, buying and selling property on behalf of young heiresses was well within the line of business of Mr Parelta's office. They also helped said women to relocate, find jobs, if that is what they wanted, or invest in young men starting new businesses. He really provided all those services to people of Mother as he did for people sent from the Farm, with the difference that the money involved with the later deals didn't really belong to their presumed owners nor the businesses were always real. Heaven needed to make money in Mother to cover their operating expenses so most of the businesses were for real, though they usually had a secret side, like the print shop that besides doing regular printing work, made fake documents such as Anisia's birth certificate or a college diploma if she required one.

Parelta was a native of Mother, though his parents were from Heaven. His sister inherited and together with their elder brother managed the business their parents founded, a pharmaceutical company that had been responsible for 'discovering' several very successful drugs that, in reality, had been taken from the archives at Heaven. All siblings grew up not knowing their parents were from Heaven. They were told once past their teen years in what supposedly was a family vacation at the Farm. Children were not good at keeping secrets so they lived a normal Mother life during their earlier years until past the conflicting adolescence years. None of them were forced to play their double role and several children of Heaven families or mixed parents have not accepted -some, in fact, never knew one of their parents was utterly foreign- but all three siblings went along with it.

The sister, being the firstborn -and only- female, would play the heiress and reach into Mother's high society, something she was bound to do anyway and had been educated for, given the business she inherited, except that she would have a wider agenda than otherwise. She also presided the foundation that held the patents on their products and served to divert money into Heaven's coffers. The older brother, as was traditional in Mother, would take his father place managing the company and he proved good at it, not so at chemistry as his father had been. Since the patents were held by the foundation, from which the Parelta siblings could be voted out, Heaven remained in control of that source of income and, anyway, there were many more drugs in the archives to start several new companies if required. The chief researcher and several of the top scientists, the 'discoverers' of the drugs, were also natives of Heaven or children of natives.

The younger brother wanted to become a lawyer which eventually proved useful to Heaven's interests in Mother. As Heaven's operations expanded, there was an increasing need to move people around, buy property, set new businesses and all that required a lot of paperwork since it could not all remain undercover. They were well past the stage of getting by with a few family shops.

----

"This way, Ms. Paniul, please, Mr Parelta is waiting for you," said the secretary as she led Anisia to Parelta's office.

After the formal greetings and courtesies, Parelta said, "Please, Anisia, speak freely, there is no need to lower your voice, my secretary is also one of ours and she won't let anyone pass her desk and get within earshot. However, most of my employees are locals, unaware of your origin so out of my office do be careful. We'd better keep addressing each other formally and I recommend you use the local expressions so you can practice and avoid giving ourselves away. You'll be a guest of my sister while in town so you will be able to relax, since I believe this is your first time away from the Farm on your own."

"Thank you, Mr Parelta, I'll do my best. Your accent, though, is not from 'good old country', so to speak"

"Because I was born here, my siblings and I were born here and we all grew up here. Our parents were from Heaven, thus, I don't need to pretend as my parents had."

"I didn't know that! I mean, sorry, I've known Mother-born children in the Farm, but just youngsters."

"Well, there are even a couple second generation in the club. Our people have been here for quite a while and we just carry on with our lives, as you will, and I'll be happy to help you with that."

"Thank you. Anric told me of a new town being repopulated."

"Yes, indeed. My office keeps an eye on such news for the benefit of our clients, both local and *foreign*, so to speak, as yourself. The regional government of Pinnacle, not Pinnacle City but the government of the region where Pinnacle City is, is building a new town and they are opening the place for bids on the houses there. The town, Banglion it is called, will be well connected via train and canal to the rest of the region since it was a main junction before the Great War. Just a matter of geography, the place was a good location and still remains so. It had not been populated in the Reconstruction because it had been too badly damaged in the War. The region has run out of easy places to re-populate so the time has come for Banglion. Here is the brochure. I have more information, of course, but this is a good starting point."

"As you can see," continued Parelta, "the place has been completely sanitized. All sort of things lie buried in those places, from human bones to unexploded ordinance. You don't want people to find a skull while planting their rose gradens. The ruins of some of the buildings have been kept, as you see in this picture here, some as a memorial, others as simple reminders of what happened. We should not forget the Great War."

"It sounds a little ghastly to me," said Anisia.

"Yes, I know, that is a difference in our cultures and in this case, I place myself on this side since I grew up in Mother. Here we have reminders of the War everywhere, we can't deny there has been a war and we don't try to. It explains why and how we got here and where we don't want to go ever again. Our population has grown four-fold since the Great Collapse and even so, we don't reach a tenth of the population we once had. We were on the brink of extinction. The population decreased for two generations after the hostilities ceased due to starvation and decease. It is all in our collective memory and we plan to keep it there."

"But you can't still feel guilty about that."

"And we don't. We weren't there, it was not our society, there is no personal or collective responsibility for what happened then. We do have a responsibility to make sure it doesn't happen again. We must learn from the past. This somehow confuses foreigners when they see these ruins for the first time, they come as a shock to them and they react according to their sensibility. But you'll get used to it. Anyway, we can talk about this kind of thing later, we are invited for dinner at my sister's."

"I am sorry, and thank you. And your sister, of course. I didn't meant any offense."

"No offense taken, we are used to such reactions, we've dealt with plenty of newcomers, but we'd better leave it for later. As for your future, you know that in Mother only women can own real state. The price of it has been rising to unaffordable levels in places like Pinnacle City where it is scarce so they created Banglion. The town will have housing but also local industries and other businesses. We, that is, Heaven, are interested in owning property there and setting up a couple of businesses. We have plenty of properties owned by supposedly absentee landladies who don't actually exist, but we prefer to have real people. We already have one woman candidate for one of those two businesses and we could fake the other but then, you showed up and we thought you could be the other woman."

"But isn't it mothers, not just women, who can own property?"

"Yes, and excuse me for being somewhat blunt but we expect you to eventually have children. I know, in Heaven that would be none of my business but this is a normal topic of conversation here in Mother. Our mother passed away two years ago and my sister has no children yet, no permanent partner either, but she has three more years to become pregnant. Her eventually having children is a regular topic of conversation at the table. Otherwise, she has to sell her inheritance."

"You mean that I have to have children in, what, five years?"

"You are younger than my sister so you have more time and, anyway, should it not happen, we could find alternatives. Some women rent the house they once owned, just as men do. We, men, simply rent unless we become permanent partners of a woman. My elder brother and his partner has been living together for three years now and I have a niece and another baby is on his or her way."

Seeing that Anisia was still somewhat out of words, he went on, "Listen, Anisia, you knew all these. You learned about it in your training before you were sent here. I know, it feels quite different when you face it in person. Your instructors at Heaven, almost all of those you talked to while in the Farm had not lived it themselves, it is all theory for them but you'll have to face it. Women talk about this all the time and you are lucky you don't have your mother putting pressure on you to get a partner and have children. My sister had it easy, at least from our mother, but her friends and their mothers peddling their brothers and sons! Even after so many years here our mother was horrified."

"I'm sorry. You are right, it is strange to be talking about my private life in such a way. I am not yet used to the idea that I'm about to start a normal life. I assume you are acquainted with my situation."

"To the extent that it is relevant to your future, yes, I am. I know you had a conviction for something drug-related but that your behavior has been spotless since you've been in Mother, in fact, you've been commended more than once and your evaluation is above average. Thus, your probation period has been shortened and, in planning for your future, we can treat you as a free person.  Your degree is in chemistry though you've not been practicing lately, to avoid any temptation, I understand. Your supervisors don't think such a temptation exists any more and so does the judge up there. This is something I need to know from you. I have a position for a chemist. Do you feel capable of taking it?"

After a few moments in silence, tears started to fall from Anisia's eyes. Parelta pushed a box of paper tissues towards her. He wasn't good in handling these emotional situations, his sister was much better at it so, since they would meet shortly, it made no sense for him to blunder into matters he was unqualified for.

"Let me give you the whole picture," continued Parelta after a while. "Our pharmaceutical company, the one my family supposedly owns, needs to open a new facility near Pinnacle City and Banglion is a good place to do so. We can hire local personnel for most of the positions but, of course, we need our own people in positions of responsibility. It will be a manufacturing facility so there is no research, but we need a lab in-situ to do quality control of both the supplies and of our products. We think you can do that, our lab chief would still have to interview you but, a priori, your qualifications are good. You would reside in the town, in fact, you would nominally own the place and rent it to us. You will hire one of our own people as general manager for that facility. He will take care of administration and sales. His partner, also one of us, will be the owner of the other business we are planning for Banglion, a book publisher. We intended to invite them to dinner but then thought it might be too much for one day, and I see we were right. You are probably tired from the trip as well. Let me have someone to drive you to my sister's," added while pressing a button in the intercom, "Ms. Paniul is ready to leave."

"Thank you Mr. Parelta," said Anisia when she found her voice, "It is a little overwhelming to have your future unrolled in front of you. I have been living from day to day with freedom a somewhat distant goal. I thought I would have freedom and a future. It turns out, you offer me a future but I'm not sure how much freedom. I've just realized how much freedom I have right now, working without any long term responsibility at the Farm or the Island."

"Anisia, my child," said a voice behind her. Parelta's secretary had quietly entered the room and was using her real name, "Allow me to call you that, you are younger than my own daughter. You are facing the choices every young person of your age faces. Your path in life was suddenly suspended by a silly misstep, but your dreams of a future probably involved the pieces you've just discussed with Mr. Parelta, obviously in a different form, but they were there. We are offering to get you back on track. Yes, it is not the careless freedom of a child, but the responsible path of an adult. Now, Jan is about to show up any second now, he will take you to Ms. Parelta's home. If Mr. Parelta has nothing else to add, I would suggest you take your time and think about all this, you can discuss it with your hostess."

"And we can all talk it together at dinner," added Parelta, "Here is Jan. It's been a pleasure and we'll meet later, Ms. Paniul," he said while standing and slightly bowing his head with his right hand to his heart.

Anisia, standing up, was about to raise her hand to reach his when she realized he didn't mean to shake it. She simply replied to his greeting, thanked and greeted his secretary and turned to leave.
