10 - Anisia gets the Job

Anisia spent almost all that day at Parelta sister's house, Fioni. She was very kind answering all of Anisia's doubts. Not only that, based on previous experience, she insisted on talking about subjects Anisia was somewhat shy to ask. To offer further practical advise, Fioni invited friends of her, locals, so she could have a sense of what people talked about. Since Anisia had not brought suitable clothes with her, even if her wardrobe back at the Farm had had anything to offer, Fioni took her on a shopping spree, so she would have clothes befitting her new position, should she decide to accept it.

"Fioni, are you trying to bribe me with all this?"

"Just a little bit, Anisia. However, consider that I would not bother if I didn't feel you would do fine. Perhaps it would be better to call it a little compensation for all the uncomfortable things we've talked about, you know, adapting to our manners, our culture, moving to a new place, starting a new job. That's a lot to take in at once and my brother probably was a little too blunt."

Early on she had an interview with the Chief Scientist and he pronounced her fit for either position. The other position available to her was as a regular lab technician at that same research facility, a position that could be taken by a local and had few responsibilities -or future- beyond her daily chores. If she didn't want either of those, she would just return to the Farm and work as she had been doing until something else eventually came up.

Meeting her would-be neighbors was probably the deciding factor on that trip. Baria and her partner Jon were very nice people and she felt very comfortable with them. They met several times and they also encouraged her to accept the offer. By the time Anisia had to go back to the Farm, she was ready to accept and meant to say so to Parelta in his office.

"Anisia, I don't want an answer from you right now. It is an important decision and it would be unwise to make a commitment when you've just been through all this excitement. I would like to have your answer early next day, once you have arrived back at the Farm and had a chance to be both on your own and with those who have been your friends these past couple of years. You are an insomniac, you will have a whole night to think it over. I would suggest you talk it over with your friends back in the Farm while they are awake and then think it over during the night. Let a couple of meals pass after breakfast and let me know your decision. Even if you decide to carry on, you may change your mind later on. However I'm afraid that if you do so once we are committed we wouldn't trust you with responsibilities such as this. On the other hand, if you decline, we will simply assume you decided you are not ready yet. You still have the lab technician job available if you want it, or neither of them. In such a case, we would still consider you for other positions in the future, though I cannot say when since opportunities like this don't show up every day."

----

Anisia spent a sleepless night which, for an insomniac, is a lot to say. Both insomniacs and sleepers take naps during the day and insomniacs keep napping while sleepers hibernate during the night. Anisia was having trouble taking those naps. She had talked about her offer with a few people whose opinion she valued most. They were all positive though all added the same caveats about life within Mother's society and culture. The problem was, she would have to face those issues at some point and she could not delay it indefinitely. Would she be better prepared for that in the future? Would a less exposed position, such as the alternate offer of becoming a simple lab technician, be any easier? After all, the problem was not the kind of job but all that would happen beyond the job itself, that is, living in a different culture. She would be exposed to that either way.

Anyway, she thought, the new factory, the one she would supposedly own, would not be ready for a year. In the meantime, she would work as a technician at the main lab in Port Saltim training for the job. That would give her plenty of time to get used to Mother. Any blunders she might commit would happen there, before moving to her future home in Banglion. Thus, it would not just be training in chemistry but also in local manners and about living amongst the locals.

Still with all the uncertainties and fears clinging to the back of her mind, in the morning Anisia had decided to accept the offer. She discussed it once more with Anric, just to make sure she wasn't overlooking something. It only confirmed her decision, thus, she started to prepare her departure to Port Saltim. In the future she would return to the Farm as a visitor but she would no longer be a resident. She waited a couple of meals after breakfast to send a telegram to Parelta as he had told her to do, mostly because she feared he would reprimand her, however, by the time she did so, she had most of the stuff she would keep packed and ready to go, the rest distributed amongst her friends.

She had a great farewell party during the third meal. Almost everyone knew about her past, why she got sent to Mother and felt happy that that part of her life was now over. She even got a message from the Island including a separate one from the guy she took care of in the infirmary. She left after the party. Chus drove her to the station and helped her consign her extra luggage.

She stayed at Fioni's while her fake papers were ready. They had to make up a past for her and she would have to learn it. Parelta often used the same places because people from Heaven or their descendants lived there. She made several trips to each of the places she had supposedly lived and studied in and met these contacts. They would show her the place and the everyday landmarks such as shops, the school, bars and diners, parks and playgrounds, and tell her what the weather was like, what did people do in their spare time, who she should know about, gossip she must have known and such. It wouldn't do for Anisia to tell someone about a childhood of hiking in the mountains if her birth place had none. She also made a couple of trips to Pinnacle City to the offices of the regional government to sign up for her house and the land for the factory she would own in Banglion though, in general, Parelta would do most of the paperwork on her behalf.

Her private life was starting to get going fine. She moved to a rented apartment on her own and did a more or less normal life. She learned two important and unexpected lessons. The first was to call her friends to go out. It took her a while to realize that meeting other people was an option in Mother, an option that you had to actively cultivate, not something that would just happen. In Heaven, the colonies were very densely populated so that meeting other people was unavoidable while privacy was priceless. Later on, in the Farm, they had a small community and just by showing up at the communal places you would meet whoever else wanted to be with other people. They had more space to be alone than in Heaven; besides staying on your room you could just walk out into the open, but getting together with other people was something that simply happened. Thus, Anisia had never developed the need to call other people. When the idea dawned on her, she called Fioni to check it out, which triggered profuse apologies from her for missing out on this. Anisia was the first one in Fioni's experience to be alone for so long. Anisia had failed to notice because, being an insomniac, she was used to long periods of solitude. Fioni, on the other hand, was used to getting anguished calls from lonely migrants.

The other lesson was in dealing with men and dealing with other women in relation to men. In Heaven, they could not put artificial cultural restrictions on what each member of society could do, the resources were too limited to allow the ability of an individual to go to waste because of being the _wrong_ sex. In Mother, each sex had predefined roles which were even cast in the law. Men could not legally own real state and not all women could, only those with children had a permanent title, childless women could, at most, have temporary title until a certain age. Anisia knew in her mind there had been good reasons for that but never felt how it affected people's behavior.

In the Reconstruction after the Great Collapse the population was very low. The general gloomy outlook of the future made people reluctant to form families. A large proportion of newborns were unwanted, product of casual sex or rape. Society was rebuilt based on giving women the roll of the foundation of the family, along with the resources to support it. Thus, only a woman could own a house on behalf of the family she was forming. Women were responsible for the upbringing, health and education of their children and so they had to be educated themselves.

Perhaps other kind of society might have succeeded just as well, but that is what came out of those old pacifist Utopian communes. As the pressure of the fight for survival and of defending themselves started to lessen, the different personalities and aspirations of the individuals risked breaking those communes apart. Elvar the Pacifier, who was often called to settle the ever-growing number of disputes, was the one who realized that dividing the communal land amongst the women -who made up the greater part of those communes- would be the best solution. Since that solution spread all over Mother -even making that the name of the planet- and surpassed other systems, it was concluded it must have been better than the alternatives.

The system was starting to show its cracks. For one, in the early days, owning a property meant having a home plus possibly a shed for the crops or the animals, perhaps a workshop, all meant to house and support the family. Now, many women had large properties, land, factories or warehouses not directly related to their home or providing their sustenance, sometimes in faraway places were they had never been. Admittedly, renting them out provided them with income to support their families, but in a few cases, the system had allowed for powerful lineages of landowning matriarchs and, when some have too much, too many others get shortchanged. On the other hand, there were many men reliant on the charity of their mothers, elder daughters or sisters.

Furthermore, an increasingly industrialized society required more mobility and an educated female population wanted to move around to study, work and develop in other aspects beyond motherhood or simple family life. Many a woman ended up anchored to the homestead, weighted down by the possible liability of supporting their doting male relatives. Many rejected this role. The average age for the first pregnancy had been growing steadily, specially among well educated women. Such was the case with Fioni and, though she still felt an outlier in this society, to Anisia herself, and it had become so frequent in larger cities that neither of them were seen as spinsters. Many women forfeited their inheritance by remaining childless until past the legal age to inherit. With families having less and less children, sometimes there wasn't a younger sister to take over the inheritance, thus forcing a sale of the lot. Without the homestead, such families usually drifted apart.

Young widowed men had been left homeless with their children and the little money resulting from the forced auction of the house. Of course, in most cases, a decent solution was often found, usually resorting to some female relative, no matter how distant or, in small places and with the connivance of the neighbors they did as in the old days, the family would stay together, the law ignored and the house would remain in legal limbo.

Anisia knew and intellectually accepted all these rules and their explanation but after one very frustrating night out, she realized that so far she had always felt loftily above what she considered a backward custom. These people were not just the subject of an academic study and she was not a detached scholar and a dismissive one at that. She could not be part of the society with such a condescending attitude and, as had been the case once, she could cause grave offense. She could not belittle those who simply lived by the standards of their society. Doing so would turn her into a pariah. That is how societies worked, for better or for worst. Mother's society was evolving, just like any other, and more and more people were becoming aware of how outdated some of their customs and the laws that embodied them were becoming and Anisia was, in fact, in the middle of it. People her age and education were the group most interested in the change. It would be quite an irony if she estranged her from them.

----

Baria and Jon were the first to move to Banglion. They had been preparing for the move since before Anisia came into the scene. Their company had been working out of their own home, contacting authors and distributors and contract printing a couple of mockups. Basically, they had been doing what any new business looking for external investors would do, investors that in their case were literally out-of-this-world. The purpose of the whole venture was to help propagate new and progressive ideas, to give a voice to those who imagined how things could change, because when Mother learned about Heaven, there would be change and it had better be a change for the good of both sides. So, they were going to specialize on a new genre that was just starting to appear whose most fervent adepts, basically the only ones that existed, called it techno-fantasy.

Techno-fantasy was usually about how technology could change the world, about how society might be in the future, about people living in space and aliens arriving at Mother. All complete fantasy, or so they authors thought. If they only knew! They had been receiving manuscripts for some time and accepted some of them, did a lot of editing and had even met some of the authors. They expected to publish a magazine with five or six stories in installments and one or two complete short stories. They had to mix in some pure fantasy such as dragons or magicians and occasionally even some evil aliens. What they would not accept were stories about evil aliens from Heaven, the least they needed was to fuel paranoia against themselves or get the priests angry. They wanted stories with a positive attitude towards technology and aliens but they didn't want it to look like a partisan pamphlet so they had to add some variety to their selection. They wanted to create a community of fans so they planned to publish an interview with an author or a reader in each issue. Eventually, they would organize meetings and perhaps conferences. Basically they meant to get in touch with those who would be more willing to accept contact with Heaven starting with those who might have imagined it happening.

----

After a year of preparations Anisia finally moved to Banglion and after a couple of days of hard work along with visiting technicians from the main factory, managed to start production. Since the regional government had an interest in making Banglion a success, they helped with hiring people and subsidizing their relocation to Banglion or the rents on their apartments. The ones that would occupy key positions had spent some time at the main factory training for their responsibilities. They were all a pretty young group, most of them were younger than Anisia so that gave her a further standing over them.

Anisia's factory was just what it appeared to be, there was no secret activity there. As their main research lab kept pretending to discover more and more drugs, they simply needed to expand their manufacturing capacity. Her factory would start producing two of their older drugs that were taking too much space in their main factory and were becoming a hindrance to the development of other drugs. Besides, there was the simple economic incentive. The operations of Heaven in Mother were costly and they did have to make money to pay for them. Besides the subsidies, Banglion was closer to the main population centers in Mother, that is, their main consumers, which reduced their costs.

----

Baria, Jon and Anisia were very close as they were the only migrants in Banglion, the only ones who could speak freely. Jon was the accountant and business advisor for both companies, which were at walking distance from one another. Once he left some of Baria's magazines in the common room at Anisia's company and they were quite successful. After all, Anisia's employees were just the kind of reader the magazine was focused on. It didn't take long for space travel and aliens to become a regular topic of conversation, at least for a couple of meals after each new issue. Anisia had to byte her tongue more than once when some of the technicians were discussing some finer details of life in space either because they were so far from reality that it was hilarious for her or because it was so close to reality that she was about to ask how did they know.

----

Anisia would usually have the last dinner of the day with Baria and Jon. Traditionally, that was the meal a whole family would share as they prepared for hibernation and they were all like family. Anisia's plant wasn't working round the clock yet. At this stage it had excess capacity so there was no need. The processes still required some fine-tuning and unexpected issues often popped up. Until they had everything working fine, leaving the plant working overnight with a skeleton crew would only mean ending up with ruined batches of product plus wasted time in the early morning cleaning up the mess. So, the last hours of each day was devoted to shutting everything down. Anisia always stayed until it was all finished. A couple of times some process would be delayed and she had to stay alone until the end as she had to let the sleepers leave as drowsiness started to catch on them. Today, everything got finished on time so she had plenty of time to go to Baria's. She decided to go walking.

Banglion was at the edge in between the coastal plain and the inner plateau. It was divided in two parts, the industrial and the residential sides, divided by the river and the rail station. The river was navigable but for ages barges had simply passed through the abandoned ruins, there was just the locks-keeper's house who also kept a guest house were the bargemen could have a meal when passing through. The docks had been abandoned and the basin had silted up except for a narrow channel in the middle. The rail line had also been abandoned as the bridge that crossed over the canal had never been rebuilt.

The new Banglion was designed around the basin and the rail station. The rail line entered Banglion parallel to the river and so both main means of transportation were next to each other. The basin was split in two, the commercial side was next to the rail station and the industrial sector beyond. The other side of the basin was available for pleasure craft, not very many yet, followed by a park and the residential area. Not only the rail bridge had been rebuild but several others, most of them pedestrian ones, had been build to connect the two areas. In the old days, all Banglion was on just one side with houses and factories all mixed up, all noisy and grimly. Now, the residential part was quiet and full of greenery. The industrial section wasn't that bad anyway, not as in the old days. Noise and the traffic of heavy vehicles was hard to avoid but everything was clean and shiny, just lifeless.

Anisia left the factory and walked down to the station to one of the pedestrian bridges that crossed over the rail yard and then over one end of the docks. She took the helical ramp up to the foot bridge rather than the stairs. Though it took a little longer, when she was pensive she preferred to walk up the ramp as it allowed her to do it at her own pace instead of being forced by the steps and the switchbacks of the stairs. She just left her mood to set her pace and, in the meantime, she could enjoy the views all around. She was used to life on Mother but, still, every now and then she allowed herself to savor the fresh air, the greenery and the open space, so different from her life under the domes in Heaven.

To her right, the rail line continued at the same level on earthwork over the falling ground and then turned left over the bridge that crossed the canal below. The bridge was an elegant slender structure made in concrete but was covered with the typical red brick of the region for decoration. The rail then sloped down and parted ways with the canal which eventually drained into the sea while the rail continued parallel to the coast. At a distance, from where she was standing, the line of the canal could be guessed from the double line of trees whose roots stabilized its banks.

Further along the footbridge she crossed over the series of locks that drained the basin into the canal below. To her left, the basin extended for two city blocks. On the further shore, the residential side, there was a new barge, a floating home. A gray-haired woman was watering the flower pots and her partner was battening everything down for the night. A little further the 'hunk' was doing likewise. Anisia didn't mind taking a good look at the guy. She heard he was the owner of a distribution business in a warehouse he rented near her factory and that he lived in the floating home thus really owning a home that was not real state. He had arrived to Banglion more or less at the same time as Anisia with his home on tow, since it didn't have an engine. The guy had some of the best views in town, the basin on one side, the park on the other and as close to downtown as you could possibly get.

He was waving hello at her. She realized she had been standing right in the middle of the footbridge, clearly outlined against the evening sky, just staring at the guy. Well, at least her jaw hadn't dropped to the floor nor was she drooling. She waved him back with as much composure as she could muster. She resumed her path. A quick glance to the side showed he was still looking at her. She liked that. Walking was a good exercise, perhaps she should do it more often.

----

"Guess who I am going to interview tomorrow?", asked Baria.

"Some author or other, I really don't recall any of the names, I just hear the guys in the factory talking about your stories, I don't really read them, sorry", replied Anisia.

"No need to be sorry, I find them somewhat ridiculous at times. Anyway, I'm happy to hear your guys talk about them".

"So, who is it, someone I know?"

"It's going to be Fania".

"My Fania, I mean, the one working in packaging?"

"That very same one, well, I don't know where she works, but yes, she works for you".

"How come?"

"You know we receive lots of letters from our readers, we actually invite them to do so. She has been a regular correspondent and her comments are very good. She is a very sharp thinker. We have received two or three times as many letters from some other people, but few of those are worth publishing. Most of Fania's get printed, and several of them opened long debates among readers."

"I didn't know! How is that possible? She doesn't seem to be the leader of the bunch of fans of your magazine. I would imagine they would all be fawning over her".

"She signs as Space Wanderer. We won't use her real name for the interview either. Obviously she doesn't want to be known. She'll come to my office after her next shift, all quiet and discreet. Of course, you know nothing about this".

"Sure, I won't say a word. May I stare at her?" - better not, she though, I stared enough at people for one day- "I mean, now that you've told me, how can I pretend I know nothing?"

"Well, I had to tell you because she might become an asset. I will suggest she writes a column for us, a paid column. If she's going to get paid, her real name will show in the books and I'll have to tell her Jon is the accountant for both of us".

"You are getting her letters for free right now; if you are paying her, she must be good".

"Well, you know we receive a lot of crap. Some contain good ideas but are badly written. We can fix the language but we don't correct the mistaken ideas they have about space travel or life in other planets. We want to look as if we shared the same common misconceptions as anyone else might. We don't want to give ourselves away. Fania comments on these errors and she does so based on what locals learn here in their own schools. Our readers learn from her. Even our writers learn from her! We have a couple of regular writers who have admitted they have changed some stories they were still writing based on Fania's comments on previous stories of theirs. One of them said as much in a letter he sent for publication".

"That's impressive!"

"It is! And I have to warn you, I might poach her from you".

"You have my blessing. If she is so good, why not? I wonder why is she working in packaging".

"I wonder that myself. I asked Jon to check her papers, you know, she came through the regional employment office and they gather lots of data, things we wouldn't dare to ask, and she never finished college, but her grades were good. Well, some of them were, others were awful, a very large spread in them. I assume she just didn't fit in. She got excellent grades in what she cared for, mostly sciences, and she simply failed on what she didn't".

"So, we have a genius in our hands?"

"So it seems."

"Space Wanderer you said? Can I borrow some back issues from you?"

"You can have the whole collection. I have one set here at home, remind me to give it to you before you leave".

"I'll have something to read for the night".

"It won't last that long, we've just closed our 11th issue and sent it to press a couple of hours ago. I can add my working copy to your pile of magazines, I have that draft with me. It is full of notes and bits and pieces glued in but it is readable."

"I'll take it, thanks. Fania, who'd have thought that of her?".
