# 11 - Searching for the Blueprints

In the two years since his appointment as Keeper of the Calendar Allucio had become a well regarded faculty member. Enuas was still acting Head Astronomer simply because Astronomy was of so little consequence within the faculty that they could not be bothered to do anything about it. If anything, they might drop that whole department so it was better to leave things as they stood. Which was fine with Allucio.

His meeting with Jobas and Marlo seemed as it had never happened. For the first days after returning from that meeting, he expected more strange instructions arriving via the lawyer, the trustee, who handed all the correspondence with their benefactor. After a year, he skipped one meeting. Then, another. After that, the trustee sent a note with the assistant who actually dealt with the bookkeeping of the department politely asking him whether they could arrange for some other time in the day that would be more convenient to Allucio or some other means that would allow them to meet on a daily basis, that their benefactor really appreciated his reports and blah, blah, blah... In other words, Allucio was expected to attend those meetings. He made renewed excuses for the appointments he missed and promised to prioritize their meetings in his schedule. And so he did. He was rewarded with a thank you note from their benefactor along with some suggestions about his current project and that of one of his students. These last came with an apology for having been of little help recently. Indeed, in later meetings, there was always some note from the benefactor with some suggestion or interesting questions or request for clarifications about his previous reports. It was obvious to Allucio that their benefactor felt somewhat guilty for having been distant in these past days and was compensating now. The reality was that the person in Heaven in charge of Allucio had passed away and his replacement was someone new that lacked the ability to cultivate the relation with his charges. That was quickly corrected.

A further year passed and then, in one of the meetings, he received a note and a large tube with a drawing inside, both sealed. The trustee handed him the note and asked him to read it and give him a reply he had to transmit to their benefactor right away. The note reminded Allucio of the structure within Pinnacle that Jobas and Marlo had mentioned when they met. It said that the time had come when it would be convenient for it to be discovered, if it existed at all. It asked whether he was still willing to help and if so to tell the trustee. It said they expected he managed to devise some credible way he could accidentally bump into it and that the drawings in the tube might contribute to such discovery.

The trustee remained respectfully silent for a while after Allucio finished reading the note. After a while, he said, "I have instructions to wait for a yes or no answer from you".

"Indeed, I'm sorry, the note says as much. I meant to help in this all along but, suddenly, when confronted with the actual question, I hesitate".

"I'm sorry I cannot offer any advice on that, I don't know what that help you are to provide is about, nor am sure I want to know. I'm not even asking if its legal which I assume it is, or so I would declare if questioned", he added with a smile, "I can only relay your answer which I need to have before you leave the office. If it is a no, I have to keep that note and the tube."

"Don't worry, sir, it is a yes, I will do it, or at least try to."

"Good, I like enterprising people and you look just like one. May I offer you my best wishes for the completion of your task. I'll let our benefactor know. I am sure you must be eager to see what's inside this tube", the trustee said while handing him the tube, "but, alas, I don't believe I am expected to see it and probably I wouldn't understand it if I did so this might be a good time to adjourn".

For an instant Allucio felt somewhat guilty and wondered whether he should hide the tube someway but then, having a tube with a roll of drawings in it is not a crime, he expected.

----

Allucio thought a lot about how to discover the structure under Pinnacle immediately after the meeting with Jobas and Marlo. While still at his mother's house he had been wondering what experiment would require him and provide an excuse to punch a hole through the top of Pinnacle. The Observatory was on the sea-side, so the bulk of Pinnacle protected it from the lights of Pinnacle City. What could justify him asking to have a view towards the other side? He couldn't think of any observation or measurement where connecting the Observatory with something on the other side of Pinnacle or to a hilltop further inland could be of any use. On the return trip, browsing through the papers they gave him, he recognized two images he had seen before.

Ten or more years ago, when he was still a student, the Observatory was in a pretty bad condition and the roof had leaked, pouring rainwater on a room where lots of valuable books and other papers had been stored quite carelessly. The Astronomy Department had asked the Library to store the books while the roof was fixed. The Librarian of the day, the predecessor of the current one, argued that they didn't deserve to have those books back and that they would be safer in the Library. The roof of the Observatory was repaired but the books never returned. Allucio, as a young student, and several of his fellow students, had helped to carry the books from the Observatory to the Library and had helped the Librarian and his people to sort out through the material and catalog it. In doing so, he browsed through many of the books, drawings and diagrams. He felt that in those papers he had seen something pretty much like the diagrams Jobas had given him.

They showed the structure laying underneath Pinnacle. At the time, all those years ago, the assistant librarian and himself had speculated about what those columns and beams could be. Besides those books and papers related to astronomy, the collection had some misplaced items such as plans for some temples and pieces of sculpture, some of which had been built and still stood. When they saw those diagrams, they assumed they might have been some plans to built what could have been some impressive decoration for the Main Temple at the foot of Pinnacle, like some rays of light extending to or coming from Heaven. The diagrams now had quite a different meaning to Allucio and he wondered what else might have been along those papers which, at the time, he didn't have enough information to interpret correctly.

The drawings in the tube were larger copies of some of those he had kept from that meeting, in the standard size for that kind of drawing and they looked old enough as to be originals, which he doubted they could possibly be. Their accidental discovery would provide a good excuse to dig for the structure. If those papers he vaguely remembered didn't appear, he could use these. So, he started to carry on with the plan he had formulated almost two years ago.

He went to meet the Librarian and asked him about the collection brought from the Observatory. He said that he recalled some images he had seen while cataloging the material when it was brought to the library and that he felt he had misinterpreted as sculptures or architectural flourishes what might have been designs and projects for instruments, a fair description of the truth though not the whole of it. The Librarian went back in time through the records and he found the ones for that acquisition. Tracing their whereabouts he found that once custody of the books had been granted to the Library, the books had not been kept as a single collection, since they were not going to be returned, but had been spread according to their subject matter. Since Allucio couldn't be specific about what he wanted, the Librarian offered to have one of the younger assistants to help him locate the individual books, diagrams or whatever it was he needed. That suited Allucio perfectly as a younger assistant, probably still a student, would not ask too many questions to a senior faculty member and with any luck, he would be interested in literature or art and not in science. As it turned out, the guy was a budding scientist, a very good choice, from the Librarian point of view, for Allucio's declared goal.

Allucio wasn't planning to 'discover' the drawings too fast, neither the originals he remembered nor the ones the trustee gave him which he would have to slip among them if those didn't show up. He didn't want to appear too lucky. He asked for the books that were on the architectural or artistic categories. Those would be close enough to what he was looking for which was not a bound volume but a set of large drawings, two of which he knew about, hopefully more. Since his temporary assistant, Bengo, volunteered to help, he asked him to fetch those of the original collection cataloged as art and sculpture and look for pictures or diagrams of things that had any resemblance to a mechanism, that were too geometrical or that didn't look like the art and imagery usually found in temples. Bengo returned with a cart with about a score of books and sat across Allucio to start checking them.

That first search proved somewhat successful; they did find something that didn't belong there. It was not what Allucio was looking for, but at least it proved the search worthwhile. It was about an earlier, somewhat smaller telescope in Pinnacle. Both the cast iron structure of the support legs and the telescope tube itself had some shiny, possibly bronze embellishments like vines and leaves. The book was newly bound so it had evidently lost its original cover and a few sheets, including its title page and it just happened that the first page of what was left was a detail of one of those decorations, which probably had been the cause for it being cataloged as art. Those decorations and the friezes in the building and around the doors and windows were the only things that could be considered of any artistic value, but the book was clearly technical and very detailed, so much so that Allucio asked Bengo, who was going to rectify its index card and get a proper library classification code for it, to check it out for him to take home when they were done.

By meal time, that was the only discovery they made after a score of books. They left together to the refectory where they split, each to sit in the tables according to their rank. The Librarian, who sat close to Allucio, though closer to the center, congratulated him for the finding. Bengo had told him since he was too junior and required approval from the Librarian to reclassify the book. He also encouraged Allucio to carry on and extended the loan of Bengo for that purpose.

Allucio felt that things were going just fine, in fact, better than he expected. He hadn't been sure how good the story he meant to use as a cover for his 'discovery' of the structure under Pinnacle was going to be. Though discovering a single misplaced book amongst the dozens or even hundreds that might be lost in the endless shelves of the Library wasn't going to make much of a difference to the total sum of knowledge of humankind, it validated his search and justified his spending time on it. In his position he was quite free to do as he wished, as long as he took care of his duties, but he felt it would be better if he mentioned it to his own boss, Master Enuas, which he did as soon as they left the refectory for the common room.

Master Enuas didn't know the story about the spoiled books, since he had not been in charge of Astronomy at the time. He totally approved Allucio's work, after all the purpose of the Department was to find out things, whether in the sky or in the Library, whether original or rediscovering what was in the books, it didn't much matter to him. It might prove beneficial to the Department and it seemed the Librarian was happy about it so, they all won.

Allucio spent several more hours with Bengo in the Library going through the art books, but they got nothing else. They would go through the architectural books in their next session but, for the time being Allucio had some other duties to attend to. After the next meal and before taking a long nap, Allucio browsed through the images of the book they had found. He initially assumed that the earlier telescope had been located in the same place as the current one. There were some floor-plans and views of the site, but he couldn't match them with the location of the Observatory as it was now. He then noticed the elevation marked on one of the diagrams and, though he didn't know the exact value for the Observatory, he felt it was too low, less than half, perhaps a third of the elevation of the platform where the current Observatory was build. He then read the description of the site and he found it was referred to as very close to the top of Pinnacle, on the sea-side, just as the current Observatory was, but at a lower elevation. He kept reading and found that the dimensions given for the platform on top of Pinnacle were three to four times the width and length of the platform he knew.

He started taking notes of all those discrepancies, which seemed completely out of place in a book that was otherwise very sensible and quite precise. You expect some inflation in legends, like 'the hundred of us against tens of thousands of enemies' when there had been barely a few hundred in between the two parties involved in a minor skirmish, or any such outrageous boast, but that was not the general tone of this book. Also, when you aggrandize something, you do it in all dimensions. It didn't make sense that they would report the top platform so much larger in area but so low in height; actually, it was the height that was most often exaggerated in legends, like with giants taller than mountains or towers with their tops lost in the clouds.

Was he reading an actual description of Pinnacle before the structure for the cable was built? When had this been written? The cover and the first pages were missing, no luck there. At the back? Nothing there either. The book felt old, though he admitted he couldn't tell an old book from one that had been badly damaged by carelessness, as this had been. He finished up his notes with the book reference and page numbers, to make it easy to locate later. Then he went to bed for a long nap.

When he woke, on his way to have some breakfast in the common room, he passed by the Temple to have a look at the murals. He wanted to check on something that came to him while in bed. The interior of the Temple was decorated with plenty of images done with little colored stones or pieces of glazed tiles fixed with mortar to the wall. Most of those had been there for centuries and their color remained as intense as the first day. The images, though of high religious value, as some of his professors had tried to convince him when he was a student, were far from realistic, after all, they depicted miracles, wonders and holy men and women. And a goat. He couldn't remember the story of the goat but he remember thinking the artist didn't have a clue about goats, and he still thought it looked silly. The size of the elements depicted and the general perspective of those images was forced to highlight whatever it was they were trying to teach. So, he went all around the walls of the temple until in a semicircular panel at the top of a wall enclosed by an arch, at the very back on the right hand corner of the Temple, he found the one he was looking for, a depiction of the Temple itself at the foothill of Pinnacle. With all the forced perspective of the other images in the Temple, nobody had questioned the relative size of the Temple, the main focus of the image, and Pinnacle in the background. However, Allucio estimated that the size of Pinnacle as shown in that image matched those dimensions given in the book, more or less.

----

They spent four more sessions with Bengo, without any further breakthrough. The art and architectural books of the collection had been all checked up. The other books of the collection were in the science sections and Allucio recognized many of the titles and authors as standard reference material so it was unlikely they would find anything hidden there. They separated without setting another meeting since they didn't know how to continue.

Bengo, who had been going through the records to copy the book references to fetch them, took another look at those records and found that there had been a lot of larger drawings and folders with loose paper sheets that had been left unclassified because they were not proper books and so they were meant to be returned to Astronomy, though there was no record of them ever being picked up. There was no location given for them but, with any luck, they might have been left wherever the whole collection had been stored before it being cataloged. He went back in time through those records to find out where they had been and found a reference to a named room which he knew nothing about. He went to the office of the Librarian to ask him.

"That would be room 14," replied the Librarian, "it was named after an assistant librarian who lived there. He died when I was still a student and the name stuck for a while. If you please, correct the record and add a '14' there."

"Should I erase the name?"

"No, just cross it lightly, it might be the only thing to remind us of the man, poor fellow. Just adding the room number will do."

"Why would these papers be there?"

"I see the collection arrived some days after the man died. Probably the room was empty at the time. There might be several other items there which we have in custody but are not ours to loan."

"Shouldn't we look into them?"

"They are not ours. It is fine to check these papers since it is someone from Astronomy, its owners, who is asking for them, but as for the rest of that stuff we can only remind their owners that it is here. Actually, we might ask them to either take them out or formally grant them to us."

"Should I ask Master Allucio?"

"Yes, please, if they make a decision on that, then we can go through the formalities. Tell Master Allucio and let him decide and, after you are free, please make a list of what remains there, just the departments and an overall description so we can write to them, again, about their leftover stuff here."

Bengo went to the cabinet holding the keys and found the one for room 14. He took a cart and went to the room. Even the remotest corners of the Library were visited every now and then, the rooms ventilated, the floors swept, the baits renewed and the traps checked. He entered the room and opened the shutters for light. He started checking the shelves, they had signs with some description of the contents. They were not categorized as was the rest of the material in the Library, a few books had catalog numbers, but they were grouped by owner. It didn't take him long to find the papers belonging to the Astronomy Department. He went to the hall to pick the cart, which he carefully maneuvered close to the shelf, and started moving the folders and rolls of drawings to it.

When this project started, the Librarian told them to pick one of the private reading rooms, which could be locked, so they were free to leave under key any material they might be working with. Bengo moved a first batch of the drawings there and then made a second trip to bring the rest. He left a note in the empty shelf in room 14, closed everything and returned the keys and the cart to where they belonged. He expected to see Allucio in the refectory later on and tell him about the extra material he had found. Allucio had some duties to attend to after the meal, but would go by the Library as soon as he was free. Bengo also told him about the issue with the ownership of that material. Since Allucio would probably see the Head Astronomer in the common room after the meal, he would mention it to him then.

----

When Allucio came in the Library, Bengo was behind the counter helping some students. "Master Allucio, please", he called, waving the key to the reading room. "Thank you, Bengo. Good day gentlemen, please carry on. Meet me in the room when you are done." said Allucio while taking the keys and the students mumbled something suitable for the gown he was wearing if not to his person since he didn't recognize any of them so it was unlikely either of them would know him.

"What do we have here?" asked Allucio when Bengo entered the room. He was already wearing a smock and gloves and was browsing through the contents of one of the folders. Bengo told him how he had located them.

"But if they weren't categorized I probably never saw them." said Allucio.

"Who knows, sir" replied Bengo, "but since we haven't found what you recall having seen in that collection, I thought we might try these. Perhaps one of those drawings?"

"Yes, I though about those but they look somewhat fragile and since they are large, I decided to wait for you and have a couple more hands to unroll them with care".

"Anything interesting there, sir?"

"Some handwritten notes, letters and draft papers from an astronomer I had never heard of before. The letters are dated so it won't be hard to locate him in the faculty records, though I wouldn't bother much, they all seem quite speculative, which is the proper euphemism for 'totally bogus'." Allucio went into an explanation of all the spurious material they had from astronomers who had never bothered to actually look at the sky but speculated instead with the most outrageous concepts. "As you probably know, I'm an insomniac so I can actually see Heaven when it is lit while the atmosphere here in Mother is in darkness and doesn't shine. A blue sky is a wonderful thing for poets, but it completely hides the sky beyond our own atmosphere. Most astronomers have been sleepers, a few were insomniacs, more than in the general population, but still very few, and some others had helpers who were insomniacs. The sleepers could only see the sky, briefly, during the mid-day eclipse, but Heaven is dark then. There is a story about one that slept under the telescope. He would lay there at sunset and tried to see as much as he could when the sky darkened, until the sleep caught with him. As far as the story goes, it didn't work. When he woke up he couldn't remember much of what he had seen or he couldn't tell apart what he had actually seen and what he dreamed of in those few minutes of drowsiness before the real deep sleep settles in. His hands -well, most of his body- were inert by then so he couldn't take notes. Some sleepers did great works with previous observations, mostly sorting them, cataloging and also some great mathematical works on orbits and mechanics, but being unable to check them out against reality, they got derailed by all the bogus material."

Allucio put everything back in the folder and tied it while Bengo picked a smock and gloves for himself and then went to the rolls with drawings.

"Insomniacs, on the other hand, or sleepers who had qualified insomniacs available, did good observations, though they are sometimes hard to understand. You see, a junior astronomer could not openly contradict his boss or the settled doctrine so sometimes the observations are somewhat abstract or even cryptic. And don't take me wrong, it is not a personal complaint, that has never been the case with the Head Astronomer, he is very open and he is not an astronomer himself, he came from physics, mechanics to be more precise, so I've never had an issue with him. I still have to be careful about what I say about Heaven to avoid having the theologians asking for my head. So, there is a lesson for you there."

"Thank you, sir," said Bengo smiling back to Allucio. On the table, they had a tube with several drawings rolled together inside. "Do you want me to hold the tube or pull the roll out, sir?"

"Perhaps if I hold it downward, at an angle, like this, it will slide out and we don't need to pull it, it might be fragile. You catch it. Lets see", said Allucio while shaking it a little bit. The roll started to slide out and Bengo was holding more and more of its weight with his hands. Finally, they laid the protruding half on the table and, while Bengo held it in place, Allucio pulled the tube away. The paper felt flexible enough to risk unrolling it. Bengo excused himself for a second and came back with half a dozen small cloth bags full of sand to use as paperweights. "Fine cloth is softer than metal paperweights," explained Bengo. He placed them on the drawings as they unrolled them. The paper was, indeed, in good condition and they were able to flatten them out without a crack.

"Well now, what should we do with them?" asked Allucio. "I meant to take a look at them but, now that we have them here unrolled, we could catalog them properly, shouldn't we?"

"Perhaps I should ask the Librarian, sir?"

"Please do."

Ten minutes later the Librarian came in with Bengo trailing. "Well, Master Allucio, what do we have here?"

"These are obviously charts of the night sky, I recognize some of the groups of stars, sunrise is on that side over there," said Allucio pointing, "and they have the flourishes usually found in the drawings of that time. Any night sailor could name most of the stars in it."

"Does it have any value, astronomical or historical perhaps?" asked the Librarian.

"At a glance I would say not much. These first charts don't seem that old to be of historical value, but I would have to check them in more detail to see if they have anything scientifically valuable."

"Well, it is not really up to us, librarians, to judge that. The issue, then is who they belong to, the Library or your Department?"

"As to that, I have talked with Master Enuas and he agrees, as I do myself, to grant them to the Library."

"Which means you don't want to waste space to store them in." grumbled the Librarian.

"Storage was a consideration, sir", replied Allucio.

"Well, this is what we can do. We can take them, but you'll have to help us catalog them. I'll assign Bengo to do that. Will you be our expert for that cataloging? What doesn't get classified will return to the shelves where they came from and remain there forgotten quite possibly for generations."

"I can agree to that, most of my research is during the night so I have spare day-time", replied Allucio.

"We have a deal then. I'll have a letter prepared for Master Enuas to sign for the grant. Bengo, now you know how the cataloging process goes, your recent cards were just fine, keep it that way. There is no need to check with me for every item. If there is any doubt, please put the items in question apart and call me to deal with them once you have a pile of them, don't call me for each and every one. If anything looks too fragile, set it aside and we'll deal with it later. The first priority should be to catalog the bulk of it, then we can take care of the special cases."

Allucio didn't quite realize what he was getting into. That first roll had two dozen drawings and charts and for each one an index card was to be filled in with name, description, author, date, size, what material it was printed on and whatever helpful information they could figure. Bengo filled in the cards and would do any extra research needed, like finding approximate dates based on the name of the author or the name based on whatever characters could be guessed from a signature, the faculty records and the dates.

Allucio thought it would never be over.
