# 22 - Wireless Licensing

"Gentlemen, shall we start? Please proceed Master Allucio", said Enuas once everyone was seated.

"Yes, sir. For the record", said Allucio looking at the assistant taking notes of the meeting, "with Master Enuas, Head of Government, presiding; Mr. Parelta, counselor at law, trustee for the Heaven Trust representing the commercial interests of Heaven in Mother; Mr. Jobas, natural of Heaven, sociologist, advisor to this government on social impact; Mr. Bujas, Secretary of Industry and Commerce and myself, Master Allucio, Secretary of Science and Technology, each seconded by their own advisors and assistants, we meet to present to the Head of Government the proposal of the Heaven Trust for the introduction of a wireless communication service in Mother. Mr. Parelta, if you please".

"Thank you, Master Allucio. Gentlemen, as you know, the Heaven Trust has, so far, tried and mostly succeeded in clearing up the commercial and contractual obligations resulting from the clandestine operations of real or fictitious agents of Heaven in Mother. It has been quite a busy time for us and everybody involved. Two years ago we had many business people unsure of the validity of their contracts while other people were upset because they felt we had pushed them out of their market. This climate of uncertainty and mistrust generated a slump in commerce which, fortunately, we were able to contain with the help of Mr. Bujas and his department, and the courts whose rulings clarified the legal status of those contracts, for which the Trust accepted full responsibility, and established clear guidance on such cases. Setting up the Heaven Trust as the rightful owner of the tangible and intellectual assets of the people of Heaven in Mother was a most laborious and satisfying undertaking I have ever faced. With that transition over and having regained the trust of the business world in Mother, we believe it is time to start a new venture of such a scope and possible societal impact that it requires the approval of your Government as per the clauses of our inter-governmental treaties".

Learning about the existence of inhabitants in Heaven was bound to cause a cultural shock, however, it was relatively limited by the physical distance in between the two worlds and the limitations of travel. Initially, most people thought Jobas was the first alien ever to arrive. Only later people started to learn that they had been amongst them for decades, even though, being relatively few in number, most had never actually met one. While a few people went to the extreme of completely denying the whole issue and others believed everyone but them were aliens, most people had not been directly affected by the news and it didn't take long for it to fade into a new normality.

Even Fania's broadcasts from Heaven had limited effect. For most of the people, her reports were hardly distinguishable from fantasy, the devices she described no more than magic. Even though her magazine had increased its circulation several fold, it still reached a very small part of the population. However, the massive introduction of technology risked turning all that magic into tangible gadgets with the potential of reaching everyone.

Deciding which technology to deploy and when to do it was bound to be hard and they knew it from the start. On the one hand, you didn't want to wreck the economy by turning every existing thing obsolete at once. What would you do with all the personnel and equipment when the technology they support vanishes? Nor did you want to lead people into a spiral of consumerism, always behind the newer and better gadget, just seating back waiting for the wizards at Heaven to bring the next cool thing. On the other hand, it seemed a pity to deprive people of all those goodies but it wasn't feasible to throw them all at them at once.

For some technologies you have to start by mining or otherwise producing the raw materials it consumes and then all the infrastructure to transport, process, assemble, distribute, sell and maintain them. Where do you start?

Finally, if people in Mother assumed all novelties would come from the vast archives of Heaven, who would bother innovating? It would be bad if in a few decades all the youngsters grown in an era of abundance of ready-made ideas would lack the motivation to develop fresh ones. The archives of Heaven were huge but not limitless, eventually someone would have to invent whatever comes next. It would have to be like parents letting their children discover the answers themselves. Doing it without seeming patronizing would require a delicate touch.

Thus, an agreement was established in between the two worlds to consult with each other before the introduction of new technologies in order to asses the impact they would have on society. Medicines were already being taken care of by the Ministry of Health along with the Medical Association but that was a closer environment where the physicians themselves would mediate. The well regarded and respected family doctors, not the public, regulated the introduction of new treatments and people, except for the hypochondriac, didn't gorge on medicines unless needed. The number of sellers of quack medicines had not increased, they simply switched from selling mystical potions to elixirs from Heaven, but didn't increase the risk on the health of the population, they simply changed the labels on their wares.

"But I am not qualified for describing our proposal", continued Parelta. "Allow me to introduce to you Mr. Garno, from Heaven, our communications officer at the facility we call The Island who will describe the latest revision of our plans, as discussed with Master Allucio and his staff. Mr. Garno, please".

"Thank you Mr. Parelta, Master Enuas, gentlemen, greetings", said the youngish Mr. Garno, clearly uncomfortable addressing such an august meeting in his evidently new formal clothes. Fortunately for everyone, he was able to deliver his presentation clearly. "These two elements are the core of the system. This one", showing a small slate-colored square slab five centimeters on each side and a few millimeters thick with silvery dots on its edges, "is the wireless communicator. It allows the reception and transmission of voice to any other similar communicator by means of electromagnetic waves. It does so via this device", leaving the communicator on the table and taking the metal cube with plenty of grooves, notches and holes on its faces about 10 centimeters on each side, "a repeater node. The communicators cannot talk to one another directly, partly because they don't have enough power to reach each other. They communicate to the nodes which operate much as the telegraph exchanges, relaying the signals from the communicators. Each node can handle a few hundred communicators. People will buy and have the communicators at their homes or business. We will install and operate the nodes".

"These are not complete devices. At this point we cannot manufacture them in Mother so we packed all the components we could not make in Mother into these", he said pointing to the two devices now laying on the table, "which can be shipped economically from Heaven. The rest can be manufactured in Mother and the whole assembled into working devices. Here we have a complete working set with two communicators and one node. We put them in transparent boxes to see what is inside. We wouldn't expect the final product to look like this but then, who knows, people might like it this way. Each box has its own electrical battery, which we expect to manufacture in Mother. The batteries will be charged through a wire from a photo-voltaic panel which transforms sunlight into electricity. Let me show you how they work. If Master Allucio pleases, I would give you, sir, one of the communicators".

"Yes, of course", Allucio said while another of Parelta's assistants was already taking the communicator to him.

"As you can see, there is a number in that yellow label. This communicator here has a different number. Each communicator will have its own number. Since I might be on the other side of the world, I wouldn't be able to see the number on that communicator. We expect people to tell the number of their communicators to friends or relatives or send them letters or postcards with their number when they get one installed. We also plan to distribute listings with the numbers of the communicators and their owners and other users in the household or business. In order to call Master Allucio, I would punch the number of his communicator on the keys of my communicator and then press the green button here", Garno said while he was doing it.

"As you can see, the other communicator starts beeping, signaling an incoming call. My own communicator is beeping as well. The receiving communicator has to beep loud because there might not be anybody around, they might all be in some other room at the other end of a house. Mine beeps just a little bit so I know the call is going through, but I am just here so it doesn't need to be loud. Lets say Master Allucio was somewhere else, heard the beeping and came walking. To answer my call, he just needs to press the green button, please Master Allucio?".

Allucio does so and the beeping ceases.

"Now there is silence, which is somewhat uncomfortable. We wouldn't be able to see each other so we don't really know what is going on. From my side, I only know that the communicator is not beeping any longer. In Heaven, after pressing the green button, we usually identify ourselves or the place we are", Garno said while signaling Allucio who was clearly waiting for Garno's order.

"Allucio here"

"Garno here, good day Master Allucio, may I speak to Master Enuas please?"

Now it was time for Allucio to provide directions, "Talk to the communicator, sir, give it your name".

"Master Enuas"

"Good day Master Enuas, this is Garno. As you can see, everyone here is listening to the conversation. Should we want to talk privately, we could use an additional device like this stick connected to the communicator via a cable", which he plugged into the communicator. "The sound, instead of coming out of the communicator itself comes out from this end of the stick which I place close to my ear. The volume of the sound is now very low and only I can listen to it. I can speak softly into this other end and my voice comes out loud and clear on your communicator. You, Master Enuas, could use a similar stick on your communicator. We expect the local manufacturers to offer sticks permanently connected to the communicator on some of their models. Now, lets assume we are done talking to each other. Either of us can press the red button, I'll do it, see? Now, the other communicator makes a short series of beeps to indicate the communication is over. And that's it."

"The communicators can also listen to the broadcast channels. These are transmissions made from a few sources that can be listened to in any communicator, all at the same time. Master Allucio, if you please, press the blue 'B' button, punch 8 and the green button". As Garno said this, Allucio was pressing the keys he said and now, music was coming out of the communicator. "These are not one to one conversations but one to many, public broadcasts. They can be music, news, books read aloud by actors, operas from the best theaters, religious celebrations, the Supreme Priest daily discourse from the balcony in the Great Temple of Pinnacle or whatever the broadcasters want. All these could be offered in different channels and people could listen to any of them whenever they want". Garno nodded to Parelta to signal he was done.

"Thank you Mr. Garno", said Parelta, "these devices will be available for us to play with later on. Mr. Garno will be able to answer any question you might have. We call this an 'enabling technology' because it is not and end by itself but it enables us to do many other things. Anyone will be able to talk to any other person, which will be wonderful for extended families with relatives all over the world or youngsters studying far from home, but we believe a greater impact will be for business talking to each other across the continent. Instead of writing a letter or, if urgent, sending a telegram and waiting for an answer, businessmen will be able to talk to each other directly and make decisions or close deals instantly. Moreover, we will install units in hospitals, fire stations and watch rooms so anyone will be able to call directly and instantly to any emergency service instead of counting on people passing the message or running for help. Ships in the sea or barges in the canals can have communicators and report their location whenever they are within reach of a node. Bargemen will be able to negotiate in advance what awaits them in each stop. Trains can have communicators on board to report or receive reports of any incidence. That is why we call it an enabling technology, it allows other things to happen. However, we expect this to be a good business on its own".

"As Mr. Garno said, we have packed into these two devices all that we cannot manufacture here in Mother. We do expect, however, to have other people doing the rest. We will sell the communicator core to other manufacturers for them to assemble them, along with other components manufactured here in Mother either by us or by whomever wants to license the design from us. Things like the buttons, the speaker or the battery. They will put it all together in wooden or metallic cabinets. Some models will have the additional stick. The number of buttons will change, their location or sizes will vary. Besides the 10 numeric buttons and the green and red ones, the others are optional and different models might have any number from the basic 12 to the full 36. An extra button can be used to select a broadcast channel, as we've just seen. Others might be used to turn the volume up or down, further ones might be used to memorize some other number so that you can call your mother's home with a single button".

"Besides selling the communicator core to manufacturers, we will operate the system and we will charge for usage. We won't charge private users for the first year after installation, then we will charge a yearly fee for basic service which will include a certain number of calls per day or a certain duration. We will charge for any excess use above those limits. We will not charge to call emergency services. We will charge to businesses from day one. We will not charge for listening to broadcasts but we will charge for broadcasting. We expect newspapers to broadcast news and read advertisement. Since they wouldn't have the cost of paper, ink and distributing truckloads of printed paper, we believe the cost of broadcasting can be covered by those advertisements so they will still make a nice profit after paying us".

"Out of that we will pay the government for the license to use the electromagnetic spectrum. Yes, gentlemen, as I myself have learned a couple of days ago, there is such a thing as an 'electromagnetic spectrum' and besides the technical aspects of it, which I'm sure Mr. Garno can explain better than I could ever do, for the purpose of this meeting what it matters is that it exists, it is a limited resource and consequently it has value, like any piece of land and, just as with land, we expect the government to keep a register of who owns or rents any particular section of it and enforces their rights to it. For that enforcement and oversight, we are willing to pay a license fee."

"We plan to include as many existing companies in this project as we can. We don't want to antagonize existing business interests, we prefer to have then on our side. In order to achieve this we have plans to subcontract locally as much as we can, license any part of the business that the technology allows to whomever is interested, specially existing incumbents. We expect the telegraph operating companies to install and maintain the wireless nodes as they currently do with their wires, training the same personnel that they already have to handle the nodes. We expect the newspapers to license some of the broadcast channels to provide instant coverage for news without competing with their deeper reporting and analysis on paper. We expect them to use the communicators for their correspondents to read their urgent dispatches. In this way, we trust nobody will lose their jobs. There will be those who will refuse to adapt, bargemen who will miss on deals for shipments because they weren't connected, telegraph operators who don't want to move to voice operators. We believe these will be a minority that will still be able to hold on to their ways of doing it, though they might struggle in the transition. However, there will be far more jobs and business opportunities than those that might be lost".

"We plan to deploy the first communicators in Banglion because we've been doing tests here and have the relaying nodes already installed, it is just a matter of opening it up to the general public. Pinnacle will be next and as the two cities get connected via relaying nodes along the railroad line, every place in between the two cities will be able to use the service. Anyone in either city or anywhere along the line would be able to communicate instantly with any other person with a communicator".

"We mean this to be a good business by itself and improve commerce by eliminating delays but we also expect that people will come up with unexpected uses that can create new businesses or improve existing ones. We actually have a lot of ideas in our archives though, and this may sound selfish, we will not tell anybody about them. Dr. Jobas can expand on the subject but one of our concerns is not to smother the spark of creativity. We don't want to come with all the good ideas ourselves, not the least because we don't know if they would work. Our archives are from a distant time, a different culture; our own usage of wireless communication might be different from the way you might use it. I mentioned newspapers receiving dispatches from their correspondents. That is one use that we might have kept quiet about and let the newspapers themselves discover. In this case, we will tell them because we want the newspapers to benefit and be part of it from the start and so help propagate the technology".

What Parelta wasn't saying was, for example, that correspondents might not only read their dispatches to the editors in the newsroom but might as well be patched through to the broadcast channel and report on the news to the public as it happens. They would use that idea if the newspapers proved too skeptic and needed some more arguments. They might report on a sport competition as it is happening. They could give away all those ideas, but it was better for the people on Mother to discover them. Eventually, someone had to re-invent home-delivery.

----

This presentation was no more than the culmination of almost a year of work for Allucio, a fair part of it during the night with people in Heaven. He actually had a sort of communicator in his office, connected with some of his collaborators, and at home. It was important for them, natives of Mother, to get a feeling for how the whole system worked. The units they used were not made from the cores that Garno showed, but from prototypes, much larger, that could be modified as they gained experience. Buttons were added or dropped. The original prototypes had text displays, but they didn't seem to offer much while they almost doubled the cost as they could not be manufactured in Mother and shipment from Heaven made them expensive. In the end, they were discarded in favor of audio signals and, anyway, they could be added in future models.

Discussion of the size and shape of the units took quite some time. For most of those involved, the communicator was an important thing, almost a luxury. Relatively large wooden cabinets were much favored initially, though they were mostly empty. Though a whole communicator could be made hand-sized, they were rejected as they didn't confer the proper status to their owners. Anisia still teased Allucio about the unit they had installed at home, how big and shiny it was. The wireless transmitter she had allowed her to connect via satellite to the Farm, the Island or even to Heaven and send and receive text or images, not just audio, and it was much smaller. But that was the purpose of the trial, to get a sense of how the locals felt, and size, as it happens, did matter to them.

Soon after the first round of tests were done and the initial prototypes defined, more communicators were installed in the homes of the initial testers, to see how their families responded to it and how they used them beyond the office environment. The first round of testers had been what in Mother passed for technically oriented but it was important to find out how other people, of various ages, responded. Banglion had not grown into a big city yet, most children knew each other and those having communicators in their homes talked to each other quite naturally once their parents, concerned about trusting such a delicate device into their hands, allowed them.

It soon became clear that furniture makers would make a lot of good business as the communicators didn't seem to fit in just any place. Some families put it in their main living room, so all the family could watch the conversation taking place. Others put it in a remote place, to avoid the noise. One family put it in what can only be described as an altar.

But communicators had not been the only technology to decide upon. Heaven had been discreetly importing technology for decades now. Pigments for paint and inks, chemicals for medicines and fertilizers and many other minor products. The first decision, then, was what level of impact they would go for. Would it be something major as the communicators, something even bigger like computing systems or should they keep going on with small, gradual changes or something in between?

Fania's transmissions from Heaven didn't provoke any strong reaction in the general public. That was a relatively good outcome, the society seemed not to be specially rigid in that regard. It fired the imagination of many who wanted all of it and wanted it now, but didn't quite grasp the costs, not just in money but in the loss of traditional employment and businesses. The communicator system was the one that produced the more benefit with the less negative impact. It was even crippled down, dropping the transmission of text. Only voice would be provided in the first version. It was improved by adding broadcasting, which was one of the medium-impact technologies that could have been introduced independently, but wasn't able to stand on its own. If the communicators system was not accepted, broadcasting might be put back on the table again. The decision would now be in the Council which was the next step once Enuas approved.

----

The government was still in transition. Most of the parts that would make it were already in place but it was still acting on behalf of the Supreme Priest and its relations with the Councils of Mothers had not been well-defined yet. The original committee that decided on how to establish a Civil Government had transitioned into the Council, which would be a permanent part of the Government, but its members had been designated from the top. Eventually, council members and the Head of Government would be elected, but this had not yet happened. Elections seemed a simple issue but when you got into details, it wasn't so easy. What would the minimum age to vote be? Should voters have other qualifications such as schooling, wealth or property? Should there be any restrictions on who could be elected? Would council members be just the individuals most voted or should be voting be by regions and each region have a representative? Should be a combination of the two? Would people vote directly or should they vote electors? The archives from Heaven offered an amazing variety of options that had been tried over time in past eras. All these issues were still being hammered out.

In the meantime, the executive was acting by the power delegated by the Supreme Priest and they were experimenting themselves. The Supreme Priest had no ministers, secretaries and undersecretaries, he had the Priesthood, a meritocratic theocracy were its members had no clearly defined functions, except those acquired by tradition or political maneuvering. Most such positions had fancy and totally outdated titles, like Allucio's earlier position as Keeper of the Calendar, and they rarely matched what their actual function was. The new Civil Government would have clearly defined positions with clear responsibilities. It didn't escape Allucio that his own ministerial position was due to his good relation with Enuas, their common background in science, time and circumstances. Was he the better person for his own position? At least he had the decency to ask himself that question and, in the uncertainty, he tried to do his best to honor the trust Enuas had placed on him. 

No doubt, and the gossip seemed to confirm, clarity had been the purpose of the Supreme Priest all along. Faced with a power structure that has grown opaque and unwieldy, he decided to make a break and separate the mundane and the divine, make the mundane open and transparent, and the priesthood less mundane and more pious. Not everyone had been happy and many a High Priest had objected and a few retired, some voluntarily, some not quite, some quietly, some noisily. Fortunately, it had been clear that the majority that had voted for the Supreme Priest in the Conclave wanted this change to happen and, though some were surprised by the extent and speed of it, they kept their support.

A seemingly minor consequence of these changes was that Allucio was no longer a Doctor in Theology but a Doctor in Sciences. Theological colleges were the only ones available for higher studies just as the Priesthood was the only way into the government bureaucracy. Thus, people like Allucio or Enuas, who also changed his doctoral degree for a secular one, artificially fattened the numbers and the apparent power of the priesthood. Many members of the Civil Government, starting with the councilman who proposed the law, changed their degrees as soon as the Supreme Priest signed the law. Enuas was the second and Allucio was the nineteenth, after the many council members who outranked him.
