# 23 - The Second Cable

Heaven would keep the technological edge on Mother for decades to come, possibly more than a century. In Mother, the wireless communicators were considered high technology, even though they had to be dumbed down to facilitate their use by people not used to handle electronic devices. It would take time for people to get comfortable with new technologies to even start thinking about training them in the use of the machinery required to manufacture further devices. There were some industries that required long chains of supplies that took decades to develop. Semiconductors were such an industry. From mining and processing the various ores to producing the ultra-pure crystals used as a substrate for the devices, it was a long and delicate process. So was the one to produce graphene filaments and sheets. Mother was at a disadvantage in all those while Heaven had all the experience and could easily increase their production capacity to provide Mother.

For the wireless communicator system, the engineers at Heaven had reduced the most key elements into a set of two core components that contained all that could not be manufactured in Mother. They were small enough that tens of thousands could be shipped in a single rocket and thus be sold at a reasonable price. But the cost of transportation presented an insurmountable barrier to the introduction of further products.

So far, the cable system had worked in one direction only, shipping mostly basic organic materials from Mother to Heaven in order to trigger a self-sustaining ecological cycle in Heaven. The system could not handle traffic on both directions. The time for an upgrade had arrived.

As the cargo pods climbed up the system from Pinnacle, they would push slightly sideways towards sundown due to the Coriolis effect. Passing the midway point, they would keep pushing in the same direction relative to Mother, which would be toward sunrise as seen from Heaven. Thus, the cable was not straight in between the two planets but was arched. It seemed very little but along several hundreds of thousands of kilometers in total length, it sagged about a hundred kilometers at the midway point.

Interestingly enough, if the cargo pods went the other way, from Heaven to Mother, the cable would sag in the other direction. Thus, two cables could coexist, both using the same anchors at each planet and they would naturally stay away from each other as long as there were some cargo traveling on each.

Having one cable in place meant that the second cable could be transported over the existing cable much cheaper and safely than the first cable. Moreover, it meant that if any of the now two cables broke, a new replacement could be put in place fast enough. Actually, a third cable could be laid in between the two main ones which, as long as no cargo traveled along it, it would run straight in between the other two sagging each in a different direction away from the central cable. Such a cable could be easily put into service should any of the others fail.

Since the cable could only be manufactured in Heaven and raised up from there, traffic into Heaven had to be stopped. This took time, almost half a year after the last cargo pod sent from Mother arrived at Heaven. Laying the new cable would take another half a year so plenty of reserves had to be piled up to cover for that missing year of supplies.

The existing cable could not take the weight of another full cable, it would be too heavy. Fortunately, gravity played both ways. It played against until the midway point, but in favor once past it. So, the first step was to send a counterweight that, once past the midway point, would help pull the new cable up from Heaven. The counterweight didn't need to go in one piece, which would be too much at once, it could go in parts and from both ends. Once each part arrived at the midway point, its weight, that is, the effect on gravity on its mass, which didn't change, would be effectively zero so they could wait there for the rest to arrive. Cargo pods weighted to full capacity with plain sand were sent from Mother. Since the counterweight would eventually reach Mother, the cargo pods sent from Heaven were filled with goods. As the pods arrived at the midway point they latched to one another to form one unit. The pulling cable and the counterweight didn't need to pull the full weight of the main cable, they just needed to take the excess weight that the existing cable could not cope with. Thus, the pulling cable was much, much thinner than the cable to be deployed.

Behind the last counterweight pod sent from Heaven, a climber with no cargo pod went up carrying the end of the extra pulling cable. As the pulling cable was reeled out, it weighted more and more until the cargo pod could not raise it any more. Before reaching that point, another climber would be attached to the cable to help the first one. A total of six climbers placed at regular intervals were needed to carry the pulling cable.

The actual cable to be laid out was thicker at the midway point than at the ends which weren't that heavy. The weight issue started once the tip of the cable reached the midway point and the middle of the cable, the thickest part, started to rise from Heaven. The pulling cable only needed to reach about a third of the way to the midway point then, the actual cable, the thinner end, could start to be sent aloft. In practical terms, it would all look as a single cable since the actual cable and the pulling one were glued together one after the other.

As the climber carrying the end of the pulling cable was arriving at the midway point, the counterweight started moving towards Mother so they would latch to one another while on the move without actually stopping. Right at the midway point, the counterweight didn't weight anything. As it descended towards Mother, it started to gain weight thus counterbalancing the thicker sections of the cable that were now rising from Heaven.

Thin as it was, due to its enormous length, the cable weighted hundreds of tons that were running at several hundred kilometers per hour towards Mother with the counterweight well ahead of it. With all that mass speeding down on Mother, you didn't want to stop the whole thing to pull the counterweight out. It took too much energy to stop it and even more to start it going again. As more and more cable passed the midway point, the cable started to balance itself and the counterweight was not required. The first unit unlatched from the rest and started speeding up on its way down. By arriving early, it would allow the technicians at Pinnacle to take it out of the cable. Twice each hour the next pod at the head of the counterweight would unlatch and speed ahead of the rest so the technicians could take them out of the cable one by one. The first half of them, the ones that had been sent from Mother with sand as ballast, once in the upper atmosphere, opened the cargo compartment thus dumping the sand which would either burn up or fall as dust. This would make it easier on the technicians down at Pinnacle. The second half, carrying valuable goods, required more effort due to the weight of the cargo.

Finally, the climber carrying the end of the pulling cable was arriving at Pinnacle. The cable could not slow down yet as a sixth of it was still to be laid out. The two halves of the climber detached from one another and from the cable, and descended in parachutes. To prevent the end of the pulling cable to fly away from the main cable, it had a plain steel weight with a strap around the main cable that would keep it sliding along it. In the preparation room, at the top of Pinnacle, a drum was spinning so that it could take the pulling cable as it arrived. At the last instant, an explosive charge cut the strap around the main cable, leaving the tip of the pulling cable with the steel weight running along the main cable by inertia alone. The drum had five recesses unevenly spaced around it, each with a potent magnet at the bottom. As the tip of the cable reached the preparation room, a curved chute guided it around the spinning drum. The drum was rotating slightly faster than it actually had to so that eventually, the steel bar would get caught by the magnets in one of the notches and the pulling cable would be reeled in. The bar had to get lodged into one of the recesses so that there would be no bumps around the spinning drum as they would cause vibration on the cable. Still, the recesses themselves interrupted the surface of the spinning drum, that is why they were unequally spaced, so that they would not resonate at any frequency. The power on the motor spinning the drum was also changed randomly to change the tension on the cable and thus avoiding any natural frequency.

By the end of the day, half the pulling cable had been reeled in. The tip of the new cable was closing in. It was time to start slowing it down. There were hundreds of tons of it so it wasn't going to be fast, it would take the whole night.

Besides the pulling cable, the main cable was being carried by climbers spread along its length running on the existing cable. So far, they had been pulling up from Heaven, down into Mother. It was time for them to stop pulling and cruise along just making sure the cable was tight. The center of gravity of the new cable was still below the midway point so it would naturally slow down as it reached the top of the trajectory. However, in order to make the deployment faster, the cable was going much too fast for that. If left alone, the middle of the cable would overshoot the midway point and fall to Mother. Thus, the climbers started braking. The lasers from the power satellites were turned off and the pods turned their photovoltaic panels edge-on to the sun so as to act as heat radiators and dissipate the energy of the braking. They couldn't brake too much, otherwise they might break the existing cable, rip apart the anchorage at Heaven or burn the cable since the excess energy that the radiators could not dissipate had to go somewhere and, in the vacuum of space,  the cable was the only other thing out there. Of course, all this had been accounted for and in the end, the new cable slowed down as planned, overshooting the exact target by a few tens of meters, which was well within the operating tolerances.

The new cable was now laying along the old cable attached to each other at regular intervals by the climbers. The technicians at each end were now fixing the ends to their anchorages. Once the ends were secured, the climbers along the two cables released the clamps that held the new cable and started descending half of them to either planet. Since they were empty, they were able to do the trip much faster and were soon off the way.

The cable system now had two one-way lanes, cargo could flow cheaply, if slowly, in both directions simultaneously. It still took half a year for a single pod to do the whole trip, but once the stream of pods were flowing, one would arrive every few hours, day and night. Cargo that could not wait for so long including humans still had to ride on rockets, but those were exceptions. It would still remain expensive for people to move in between the planets, sleepers much cheaper than insomniacs since three of them could be packed in a single capsule.

Heaven had projected that a good part of their personnel in the Farm and the Island would need to be repatriated. As it turned out, many of them had been in Mother for quite a long time and grew used to it. A large part of them had been isolated from the rest of the world at either facility with limited time off in the real world and, much of that time, under the risk of being discovered, which somehow dulled the enjoyment. Now that they could travel openly, they did so quite happily and with all the changes that their own technology was bringing to Mother, they found it very exciting. Thus, many more than it was expected decided to remain in Mother though not necessarily in their former positions. With their new residence papers, they cashed in the money that Heaven offered them in lieu of repatriation plus their savings and settled for a normal like in Mother.

Eventually, the trade in between the two planets might even out but, for now, at least in weight terms, there was more traffic into Heaven than out of it. The idle capacity was used to pull an extra cable in between the other two. It was a much thinner cable as it was not meant for regular cargo. It would eventually help in the deployment of new cables if any of the existing ones broke. A breaking cable would cause little damage on either planet. Most segments of a broken cable would simply fly off into space, the ends, the ones attached to the anchorages, would be cut and let fly away. Only if the break happened close to either planet might it fall down to the surface, however, the upper parts of it would probably burn on entering the atmosphere and the lower part, being so thin and light, would descend quite gracefully, slower than an autumn leaf. People could simply walk, not even run away from it, the only danger could be someone touching it and getting a very, very nasty cut, the mother of all paper cuts.
