# 25 - The Midway Station

The main purpose of the third, central cable was as a backup for the two main cables, in the event that either became inoperative or to help pull a new one if either broke. It also helped with maintenance. The cables worn out, partly because of the traveling pods brushing against them or by floating debris that constantly hit it and caused erosion. New layers of material could be added to the existing cables, which in fact were ribbons, so that they recovered their original thickness. The central cable was crucial in that operation since the fastest way was to start from the middle down towards each planet. All the required equipment and material could be raised using the third cable, without interrupting the flow of cargo on the main cables and piled up at the midway point. When ready, the central cable could be slackened and allowed to approach the cable to be repaired, helped by rocket thrusters. Two pods, one going down towards each planet, would be transferred to the cable. Each pod had the equipment to overlay, glue and cure the two new layers, one on each face of the existing ribbon. Each pod had a train of extra cargo pods carrying the material to be overlaid and the glue. These run ahead of the layering equipment, on the old cable, to let the new layers time to set.

Starting from the midway point allowed the process to go much faster than starting from the ground up. Two layering machines were faster than one and, by going down to the planets, they could speed up using little extra energy. In normal operation, heath from braking on the way down was a problem. Usually the pods could not go too fast because then they would have to eventually brake hard which would produce heath that then degraded the material and might, in an extreme case, burn the cable. In this case, heating was part of the curing process and since it could be spread in between the main cable and the two layers being overlaid, the pods could go faster than usual. Besides, they lost weight as they approached each planet, as the new layers of material unrolled of the cargo pods, thus, they were easier to brake just when the gravity got stronger.

----

The central cable was also loaded with automated equipment. Pods with scientific instruments could be parked indefinitely in the midway point. Since the midway point was visible from all inhabited areas in both planets, it also had a communication relay, however, due to the distance to both planets, it could not handle regular two-way conversations. Even radio waves take time to travel interplanetary distances and the delay to go up to the midway point and back again made a regular conversation impractical. However, for one-way transmissions such as broadcasts it was perfect. Otherwise, the domes on Heaven were linked via optical cables and now the cities in Mother were also being linked via optical cables and radio links, which handled the voice traffic for the commies.

Existing satellites had to be discarded early on. Their orbits had to be carefully planned to avoid the cables and constantly corrected since the inevitable perturbations would eventually get them too close for comfort. Only temporary satellites were practical. They would be send up, do whatever they had to do, and send down to burn in the atmosphere. Most of them were launched from the central cable, it was cheaper to have a satellite change orbits to avoid the cable than raising it from the ground. Swarms of cheap miniature satellites carried in a cargo pod could be dropped to rain down all over either planet, do their observations on their way down and burn up on entering the atmosphere.

----

The size and complexity of further instruments ended up requiring a manned station. There were already too many pods with instruments parked along the central cable, each with its photovoltaic panels and varied antennas and other protuberances interfering with one another. When one of them went out of service, it would be detached from the cable by tearing apart the two halves that embraced the ribbon on either side, using tiny explosive charges that would propel them away from the cable and, eventually, down to burn down on entering either planet. The photovoltaic panels and other external protuberances would be jettisoned first thus avoiding the risk of them getting entangled with other equipment. The other pods in the cable could be moved away from the one being discarded and their reaction wheels could twist the cable so that the pieces flying away could be directed in any direction desired, specially away from the main cargo cables. Though the cost of sending equipment up via the cable was cheaper than using rockets, the instruments themselves were expensive and discarding a whole instrument due to a minor malfunction was wasteful. Bringing them down for repairs required taking down all the others that had piled up behind it.

For all these reasons, a manned station was needed. Permanent habitation was not required, but at least a place where a crew could live while doing observations or when mounting or repairing instruments. The station could also provide basic services like a single set of photovoltaic panels providing energy to all instruments, a common radio link and physical support for the instruments so that they didn't all need to hang on to the cable.

----

All the equipment and materials for the new midway station was piled up awaiting the arrival of the construction crew from Heaven. A crew of two sleepers was launched close to the end of the night, while still hibernating, by an insomniac crew. They would wake up about the time they arrived to the midway point, ready to start the assembly. They were already in their space suits, helmet included, since there was no space for them to change clothes. They relied on the station they were about to assemble for extra space or, as an emergency alternative, on one of the cargo pods that, once emptied of its cargo, could provide extra living space. If the station could not be assembled, they would have to return to Heaven in their crowded capsule which had been designed for one insomniac or three hibernating sleepers. It wouldn't be comfortable for two people awake but then, it was just half a trip and, if all went fine, it would not happen.

The capsule was already floating close to the cargo pod containing the tools by the time one of them, Lanio, woke up. He started drinking his fruit juice, his mouth too dry to talk. Anyway, the crew on the ground would know he was awake through the telemetry in his suit. A few minutes later he opened the radio link and started his report to the ground. The other sleeper, Ganto, soon woke up with the noise of the conversation. They would start once they felt sharp and refreshed.

They started by maneuvering the capsule closer to the pod. If everything went fine, and so far it was so, the capsule could do it automatically with the help of a beacon in the pod. They just needed to supervise the operation, ready to pull back if they felt anything was going wrong. The pod had its photovoltaic panels folded away from them so they would have no obstructions. The rest of the pods were parked at some distance as well. Once close enough, their capsule simply stopped and quietly floated. Both closed the visors on their helmets, tested the air supply and radio links in their suits and let the air out of the capsule. Once the capsule was empty of air, they waited a couple of minutes to see if their suits held the pressure, proving there were no leaks. They opened the hatch and Ganto floated half way out, up to his waist, with his legs still in the capsule. Both would remain tethered to the capsule via a security line and the hose providing them with air and electrical power.

He started to attach to one another the rods that Lanio handed him to make a pole long enough to reach the cargo pod. As with all the tools he would use, the pole had a security line attached to his utility belt. Lanio attached his security line to the rods before handing them out to Ganto and would only release it when Ganto moved his line from the previous rod to the new one, thus, the pole was always attached to at least one of them. As with most of the tools, they didn't have extras and it would be very sad to fail the mission because anything drifted away.

Ganto had to thread the ball at the tip of the pole into a funnel-shaped target on the pod. That would trigger the mechanism that would grab the ball. He succeeded after a few attempts. Then, he started pulling very slowly to get the capsule close to the pod. Though everything was floating without weight, both the capsule and the pod still had mass and inertia and they didn't want to have them crash into one another. They had much more control on the process by pulling on the long pole than navigating with rocket thrusters. As they approached, Ganto unlatched the rod segments and handed them back to Lanio inside. Ganto recited the steps one by one while he was doing them since Lanio could not see him. It was important that he wouldn't miss a step and forget attaching one security line before detaching another of forget any other step. The ground crew down on Heaven also listened to this and someone was checking on a list making sure no step was forgotten.

After a few minutes, there was only one rod left in between Ganto's hand and the pod. He attached the near end of that rod to the capsule. The link was not yet rigid as the rod was fixed to articulated points at both ends. Using that rod as a precise reference to the relative position of the capsule, the reaction wheels made slight adjustments to the attitude of the capsule so it would be perfectly aligned with the pods. Lanio handed back to Ganto one of the rods which he threaded into another attachment point in the pod and then to the capsule. He had to attach a total of three rods from the pod to three points around the hatch. Once the three rods were fixed, the articulated attachments on the pod side went rigid so that there would be no further movement in between them. From Ganto's point of view the pod was above his head, nominally up, in line with the opening of the capsule. Ganto attached the carabiner on his secondary safety line to one of the rods and, while Lanio made sure his hose and main line could run free, he completely exited the capsule and moved to the pod to inspect the attachments there. He then opened the doors on the pod and made a quick visual inspection of the contents.

The capsule carried almost no tools nor equipment. All the extra space was taken by food and water just in case they had to return in it while awake. In normal circumstances they would start their return at the end of the day, just before hibernating but, if they couldn't get the station ready, they would have to do it while awake, requiring far more supplies than sleeping. They would leave those provisions untouched as the capsule would serve as their lifeboat until the habitability of the station was assured. Other pods had extra food, water and air for them to use.

The station and the rest of the equipment and supplies were in the other pods that had been parked away while the capsule maneuvered. The pods weighted several hundred kilos each and it was safer for them to be ready to bail out should anything fail. So far, they only had their fruit juices and a light snack, all that a waking sleeper could take, and for the rest of the job, they would need something heartier than that. So, Ganto returned to the capsule and closed the hatch, then, they re-pressurized their capsule, opened their helmets and ate a decent breakfast while the other pods, one by one, reached closer to the pod their capsule was attached to and firmly linked to one another. By the time they finished their breakfast all the pods were latched together with the cable threaded through them and their capsule fixed on the side of the one at the end of them.

They got ready for the longest excursion that, if all went well, would end with them inside the new station. Both came out of the capsule and went to the further end of the train of pods. The hose from the capsule was too short for that so first they pulled out their backpacks from the nearest cargo pod, helped one another to wear it and switched their supply lines to it. Now they could move freely. The pods had a couple of rails that run all along them. They could propel themselves with their hands on those rails, which also served to attach the security line. They opened the doors of the pods as they passed by them, visually inspecting the contents and reporting to the ground.

From the last pod, they pulled out the cart that would serve as the base for the mechanical arm and attached it to the rails. This would allow the mechanical arm to move along the train of pods over the rails, just as they had been doing. They then activated the mechanical arm. It was a three segment articulated mechanism, symmetrical so that either end could be attached to a fixed point and serve as its base or grab a tool and be the far end. The end now serving as the base was attached to the pod. The other end was extended and, after running a few diagnostics and checking that all the joints moved freely, they helped the loose end to get attached to the cart running on the rails. Once connected to the cart, the other end got disconnected from the pod. The arm could now move all along the train of pods.

The rails were too flimsy for the arm to operate anywhere, it could only do so at the joints in between two pods, where the rails were firmly attached to the pods. They pushed the cart to one of this points, clamped it down and connected it to the electrical power. All of the pods still retained their photovoltaic panels and reserve batteries so they could supply electrical power to other devices such as the mechanical arm. They got the arm to pick the hatch that would be at one end of the station. The arm held the hatch by the edge so that it now looked as if it was holding a frying pan. Then they turned the arm so the hatch was close to one end of the balloon that would make the station. They called it inflatable structure, to make it sound more solid, but in fact the station was a balloon made in the shape of a cylinder with hemispherical domes for caps. At the center of each of the caps, there would be a hatch.

Attaching the metal hatch to the fabric flaps around the opening of the station balloon was a delicate task that could only be done with the dexterity of a human hand. It was a tough job, with the gloves on, but if not done up there in space, the station would have had to be shipped with its hatches already attached. These not only provided access to the station but connections for anything that had to go through the doorframe, such as air and water hoses and electrical power; thus they were bulky. With the space in the cargo pod limited, shipping the balloon with the hatches attached would have resulted in less space for the cloth and a much smaller station. They finished by connecting the hoses and cables from the pod to the hatch. They left the mechanical arm holding that end of the station and moved to another cargo pod closer to their capsule that had another mechanical arm. They repeated the same operation at that end. They mounted the cart, got the mechanical arm to attach itself to the cart, moved it to the pod containing the other hatch, picked it up, attached it to the other end of the station and got the duplicate set of hoses and cables connected.

Finally, they both moved to the pod containing the fabric for the station and attached themselves to one of its sides. The cargo pods have three sections, the climber is the mechanism that grabs the cable and climbs it. It has both mechanical rollers, used at low speeds, and the induction engine used at higher speeds, along with the reaction wheels, batteries and electronics to make it all work. The photovoltaic panels are attached to this section via articulated joints. Two compartments are attached at either side of the climber as to balance the weight on both sides of the cable. The standard compartments are shaped like a cylinder cut in half along its long axis. They could be any shape as long as the weight is balanced and it doesn't cause too much drag when crossing the atmosphere.

The balloon was contained in both compartments of the pod with part of it connecting both halves like a hinge. They opened both compartments, temporarily removed the rails, and took out the covers on the side that protected the folds of the balloon that connected the two compartments. They commanded the mechanical arms at each end to start raising the cloth out of the pod, with them constantly checking it unfolded fine without any tears. When the near compartment was empty, they started helping with the folds coming out of the far compartment After several minutes, the mechanical arms were fully extended holding the balloon in between them, away from the pod and specially from the photovoltaic panels and other protuberances that might tear the fabric.

They commanded one of the air conditioning units to release some air into the balloon which slowly started to inflate. In the vacuum of space, just a little inside pressure was enough to make it grow large.

The hatch at one end of the station was quite close to their capsule. This particular capsule had been fitted with two hatches, the smaller one, which had been added for this mission, had been the one they had used so far and a larger which they would now attach to the station. Ganto climbed to the capsule via the poles that held it in place but, instead of going inside, which he couldn't with the backpack on, climbed to the side, to make sure the hatches of the capsule and the station fitted one another. He would control the mechanical arm holding the nearest end. Lanio, down at the pods, would control the mechanical arm further away.

Once the end of the station was attached to the capsule, which was held in place by the rods, the mechanical arm could be used for further tasks. The external membrane of the station was actually made of several layers of different materials with empty space to be filled with foam. The precursor of the foam was already painted onto the inner faces of the membrane to ensure an even distribution. By injecting a gas with the proper chemical reagent, it would start to foam. The foam would make the outer wall rigid and would provide further protection against small meteorites. Though the total amount of material is the same whether compacted or foamy, the bubbles in the foam provide many small surfaces and, as any swimmer diving into the water knows, breaking the surface is harder than pushing through water. Likewise, for a meteorite it is harder to break through the many surfaces in the bubbles making the foam than pinching through the same amount of compact material.

Lanio maneuvered the mechanical arm to pick the gas bottle containing the reagent from one of the pods, then raised it within reach of Ganto. Ganto picked the flexible tube from the gas bottle and inserted it into one of the valves sewn into the fabric, then he opened the valve and let the gas enter the middle layer. The tubes that made the wall could be seen inflating as the gas entered them. There were several of those valves around the hatch, each reaching a separate section of tubes. Once one section was filled with gas, Ganto would detach the tube from the valve and move to the next valve and repeat the operation. It would take four gas bottles to fill it all. Lanio would maneuver the arm to return one empty tube to the pod and pick another for Ganto. It would take a few hours for the foam to turn rigid but the inflated tubes that made the walls of the balloon already made it look much more solid.

----

The station was close to being minimally habitable. The reaction producing the foam produced some heat so, as a side effect, the inside of the station was being heated to a very comfortable temperature which would allow them to occupy it before the full life support was installed. They had reached a decision point. If they were too tired, they could stop now and make another exit later on. They would not enter the balloon yet since they would need to de-pressurize it later, wasting a full load of oxygen. If they wanted to take the break now, they would do so in their suits, in the capsule. On the other hand, if they weren't exhausted to the point of becoming clumsy or careless, it would be better to keep going and then eat and rest in the far more comfortable balloon. They reported feeling fine and the ground controllers concurred that by listening to their voices and through the reports of their actions, they seemed fine to carry on.

They took a couple of rods and attached them to notches on the side of the hatch and to the pod. Now, the near end, the one closest to the capsule, was held by these new rods themselves, not just by the capsule. They moved to the far end of the station. The mechanical arm was still holding the hatch on that end. They did the same thing, linking the balloon and the pods. The rods attached to the outside of the pods, leaving ample space for them and the mechanical arm to travel along the rails.

They now detached the end of the mechanical arm that held the hatch. They would use it to get the equipment into the still empty balloon. Lanio secured his safety line to the rods and climbed to the hatch and opened it after releasing the little gas inside. Since the walls of the balloon were now filled with the foaming gas, the balloon would keep its shape even though the foam was not yet solid. This hatch was much larger than the auxiliary one they had used so far in the capsule so he could enter the balloon with his backpack on. He got his feet inside and got in up to his waist. Ganto, down at the pods, was maneuvering the arm to pick the first of the containers. Once the mechanical arm had the container firm in its grip, he unlatched it from the climber and then commanded the mechanical arm to raise it and move it to the hatch. Lanio had a series of fishing lines with carabiners at their ends all around the inside of the hatch. Each line went to a small loop of cloth sewn on the inside of the station and then back again to the hatch. Each line was color coded. Lanio would take the carabiner of the color corresponding to the color on the ring of the container and latch it onto that ring. Then, he would help guiding the end of the container through the hatch until the mechanical arm was close to bump into the hatch. Ganto would command the arm to open the grip and let the container loose. By that time it was already half way in and secured by the safety line. Lanio, from the inside, would either pull the other end of the line or grab the container with his hands to pull it in. Once fully inside the balloon, he would pull the line to have the container safely parked away instead of floating around and bumping into things. He used that same line to float up to the container and securing it with a strap of cloth sewn to the balloon. By the time he returned to the hatch, Ganto was already maneuvering the next pod close to the hatch. They repeated the operation for all the eight containers. Now they were ready to have some rest.

Though Lanio was already inside the station, he would need to go out again and enter through the capsule. If they wanted to exit the balloon through the still open hatch, they would have to waste precious oxygen each time. Until they installed the entrance hall, a small balloon attached to the hatch with an extra hatch that would let one person at a time come in and out wasting very little air each time, they would have to use the capsule to enter the station. So, Lanio went out and closed the hatch and commanded the air conditioning units to pump air into the balloon. Ganto was already moving towards the capsule. When he got to the rods holding the capsule in place, he plugged his air hose from the capsule to his suit and turned off his backpack. Lanio then helped him take the backpack off and stow it in the pod. Then it was Lanio's turn to hook his suit to the capsule and Ganto's to help him get rid of the backpack.

One after the other, they entered the capsule. They closed the external hatch and, without taking their helmets off, opened the valve in the hatch to let the air into the capsule. As they were still in vacuum, they couldn't hear the hissing sound of the air through the valve. They started hearing it when as the pressure increased but then ceased again as the pressure was the same on both sides. Finally, Lanio opened the hatch and entered the station.

The flow of air from the oxygen tank on the pod soon stabilized which was a good indicator that there were no leaks. Lanio took the air quality tester, from one of his pouches and tore the envelope open. The tester was a plastic card with several paper strips soaked in chemical reagents inside a plastic envelope. Their main concern was the foaming reagent, which could irritate the eyes and respiratory tract. He took the card and fanned it for a while. The papers strips changed colors and they matched the colors printed on the base card for a safe condition. He then opened his visor. Ganto would still wait a few minutes, if Lanio fainted or something strange happened he had to be able to assist him. Lanio reported the air smelled just fine. The station was dimly lit by the lights on the rim of the hatches so, while they waited, they took the lights out of one of the containers and started plugging them into their sockets. When the ground controllers called them to report that Lanio's telemetry showed no sign of distress, Ganto opened his visor and they both took their suits off. One of the containers had what they called the welcome kit. They cleaned themselves with the moist towels and wore the fresh clothes. It would take a while for them to mount the toilet inside the station so they had to make do as best as they could. Then, it was time for the hearty meal and a good nap.

----

They would expend the next work shift inside the station, unpacking and installing everything from the containers. First, an inner blanket containing a healing fluid would then be attached to the inner wall of the station. If any hole reached the pressurized, habitable part, the escaping air in the artificial atmosphere would push the fluid out through the hole and the oxygen in the air would react with it turning it solid, sealing the hole automatically. The blankets would be periodically changed as the healing fluid expired. The blankets had a sticky glue on one of their faces, they just needed to peel off the plastic film and press it against the walls. Then the electrical wiring had to be fitted since, so far, they only had power at the hatches. The air ducts were already in place since they were simple cloth tubes that came already sewn inside the balloon. Then they went for the equipment and the partitions. The containers themselves were designed to be reused. One of them was the shower stall, with all the pipes and pumps already fitted in. Another, finally, was the toilet.

They added internal partitions. They were made of cloth with an inside layer of foam, the same one as the outer walls of the station. The chemical reagent to trigger the foaming was the same, potentially irritant one, so they wore masks while using it and foamed one panel at a time so, in case there was any leak, it would be small and the air conditioning unit would be able to clear the fumes in a few minutes.

It took them two meals to have everything inside installed. It was time to suit up and go outside again. They had to install the entrance hall, the airlock on the other side of the capsule. Their capsule had a secondary hatch to allow them to use it as an airlock, later capsules would not have that hatch so they needed a permanent one. It would also have a larger hatch allowing them to wear their backpacks and would also be big enough to let more cargo to go through. Right now, their backpacks were stowed outside, in the pod down from the capsule so they suited up, entered the capsule, closed the hatch to the station, got their hoses plugged in and depressurized the capsule. After a quick check, they opened the external hatch, went down to the pod and helped each other to don their backpacks.

They moved along the rails to the far end and while Ganto activated the mechanical arm and picked up the inflatable airlock, Lanio climbed the rods to the hatch to get ready to attach it. There were straps around both hatches and at regular intervals on the outside of the station to allow them to pass their lower legs through and, once tightened, they would look as they were kneeling down on the wall of the station. That gave them quite a lot of flexibility to bend in any direction and good stability. Attaching the airlock was much easier than the hatches had been since there was no cloth flaps to deal with, it was a rigid metal ring against another. Once Lanio had that end fitted, Ganto maneuvered the arm to pull the outer hatch out, unfolding the cloth that made most of the airlock. Once stretched, Lanio commanded the valve on the inside hatch to let a little air in to inflate it. Finally, he picked the gas bottle with the foaming reagent and started to inject it into the middle layer were the foam precursor was. While Lanio was doing that, Ganto was fixing a set of rods from the external hatch to the pod that would serve them as handrails to climb up to it.

Now, the station was firmly attached to the train of pods on the cable at several points, however, the station had to be autonomous in the event that the central cable had to be pressed into service to replace a broken cable or carry extra cargo. It would have been impractical to install equipment on the walls of the station. The first thing they needed was to install a couple of metal rails that went all around the station like a couple of utility belts. That would make easier to install further equipment and help distribute the load around the station that, after all, was no more than a balloon made of cloth.

They pushed both mechanical arms under the station. They could attach to one another so that instead of having two independent arms they could have an arm double in length. They needed that to reach the farther side of the station. They picked the tip of the rail which was actually made of several articulated segments so as to fit in the container. They stretched it out of the container and away from the station. Once fully stretched, they maneuvered the arm to lay it on the station. Once the first segment touched the station, Lanio climbed the rails, that looked pretty much like a ladder, and attached the first segment of rail to the station with a flap of cloth sewn to a reinforcement in the outer wall of the station. He continued climbing the rails and attaching the segments one by one until he reached the far end. While he climbed back to the pods, Ganto was folding the arm to pick the other half of the rail to fix to the other side. Now it would be his turn to climb the other half of the rail on the other side of the station. Finally, the station had one belt around it. It needed another one on the other side of the equator. They started on that once they had the first one installed.

They moved the containers from the cargo pods to their locations on the belts. The attitude control systems, composed of the rocket thrusters and reaction wheels, to move and rotate the station when on its own, the air conditioning units and the power units with its reserve batteries. Finally, they moved the photovoltaic panels. With the cargo pods empty, the climbers would need much less power to move, one climber with its own panels could feed another two for their trip back home so they striped those climbers of them and installed them on the station. A short train of empty climbers were dispatched back to Heaven. A couple would remain to return the waste produced from the assembly, like empty containers, discarded wrapping material and the regular trash resulting from human habitation. Part of it would simply be carried closer to the atmosphere before releasing it so it burned down. They couldn't release it up in the midway point because it could float around for a long time and hit any of the other cables or a passing cargo pod. Finally, the mechanical arms attached themselves to the station so that now they would be able to pick up cargo from the pods instead of pushing it up from them.

The station was complete and it could even detach from the central cable and remain aloft on its own or even move to another of the cables and attach to it. Depending on how much fuel it had, it could move closer to either planet and return to the midway point, where it could stay indefinitely barely using any propellant. There were no plans to let the station loose, for the time being, it would remain attached to the central cable which would be used to carry supplies and further instruments. The station could be enlarged via successive inflatable sections, as required.

----

The midday eclipse had just passed. There was no day and night at the station, the sun would always shine at one of its ends, but it did have two eclipses, the midday and midnight eclipses, or vice versa, depending on which planet you were referring to. Over time, the crews of the station, specially those that stayed for several days, would refer to them as the Heaven eclipse or the Mother eclipse depending on which planet was blocking the sun. Lanio and Ganto would leave at the end of that day and they used Heaven time for all their activities. They were now feeling at home up in the station. Everything was in its place and, after a minor repair, everything was working fine. Now it was time to prove its usefulness.

The old automated science pods were still up there. They had been parked some distance away from the station. Two valuable instruments were broken and they had carried the spares and tools the ground controllers assumed might get them back to working condition. Ground control ordered those pods plus the ones in between, to approach the station one by one. It was time to go out and fix them.

The first one to be repaired was closer to the station. Still, there were two other working pods in between, however, with the two mechanical arms connected to each other, it would be within reach. Both Ganto and Lanio went out through the main airlock, one after the other, carrying their tools and the platform to step on. Using this platform was part of the test. They could both step on this platform, face to face, their boots locked to the platform, their knees almost touching, at either side of the central panel that had the handlebars for them to grab and pouches and hooks for the tools. Once settled, it seemed they were sitting at a table in a bar. They attached the platform to the end of the mechanical arm, loaded the tools and then climbed on it, securing the straps behind their knees. They held on to the handlebar while maneuvering the arm to get them close to the pod to be repaired. The purpose was to test the use of that platform as much as repairing the out of service instruments. They stopped the arm and then tried bending, twisting and reaching out to test the range of movements available to them. They, then, relaxed and found out that it was more natural to stay in a sort of half-seated position than fully upright. That also gave them more space than standing face to face with little space in between them. They also found the backpacks to be a little cumbersome, limiting their movements. They wished they had hoses running along the arm, they said that when they were tethered to the capsule via the hoses, they felt much more comfortable. An engineer in the ground suggested a possible fix for future crews. What if they could attach their backpacks to the last end of the arm, below their feet, and run a short hose from them? Ganto asked if the hose could be run along the whole arm straight from the station, but someone on the ground replied that it would be too risky, with so many joints in the arm and the possibility that it might get pinched or entangled. Besides with such a long hose, they would still need pressure regulators and sensors close by.

After these mobility tests, they finally approached the instrument to be repaired. It had not been designed to be repaired by gloved people in outer space. Dealing with the small screws that held the cover in place was already a tough task. Fortunately, they didn't have to put those screws back again as it would have been almost impossible to do so. They would replace that cover with one fitted with clamps that would be easier to manipulate through gloves. Replacing the failed circuit board of the instrument itself was relatively easy and, once they did so, the whole thing returned to life. They run a few tests from the ground before closing the cover. They would now go back to the station to swap the tool set and spares for the other repair kit.

The other pod was further away, out of reach for the mechanical arm. A couple of poles were fixed to the sides of the platform. They reached as far as they could with the mechanical arm then Ganto released his legs from the platform and climbed along the poles to reach the satellite. Two short lines secured him to the poles and a long one reached the platform where Lanio was standing. Ganto couldn't carry more tools or spares than fitted his pockets and pouches so he might have to return to the platform to fetch those. Ganto, once again, struggled with the screws on the cover. They didn't want them to drift away and float around. The screwdriver was designed to hold to them until released within a container to hold them but, still, it required a lot of care. 

They didn't know what failed in this instrument, the diagnostics had not been conclusive and a visual inspection gave no further clues. In the end, they swapped all that could be swapped, tightened all the screws and connectors, none of which was loose and, to lighten the mood a little bit, exorcised the bad spirits, banned all demons and intoned various other incantations. With no volunteers for a human sacrifice, they decided to pronounce it dead and return to the station.
