# 26 - Heaven's Growth

Fania had been a well-known name in both planets for several years now. Her earlier articles from Heaven brought her fame mostly along her fan base but, for a while, her articles reached the mainstream media. Being the first Mother native to arrive in Heaven since before the Great War, initially she was a distinguished visitor in Heaven but she quickly integrated into the society and turned from visitor to a permanent resident. Some said it seemed she had been born on the wrong planet, that she belonged to Heaven. She had no plans to return to Mother.

She took part in the discussions about what technologies to introduce into Mother. There was always the concern of disrupting the society by introducing too many new things at once. That is when she realized that in her articles, by describing what she saw in Heaven she, somehow, raised the expectations for more goodies, at least of her readers, few as they might be. She switched back to her earlier style, when she didn't even know Heaven was inhabited, back to techo-fantasy, dropping her reporting on how life was on Heaven.

She was a voracious learner and, being an insomniac, she had plenty of time to devour all the physics, chemistry, astronomy and every branch of the hard sciences she could get her hands on. She wanted to make that knowledge available to her people back in Mother. That is what turned her name into a household item: textbooks. Several generations of students would study from the textbooks she wrote and edited over the years. Just as with gadgets, Heaven could not just drop a completely new science into Mother, there had to be a path of learning that allowed the students, their teachers and the scientists at large to update their knowledge in a measured way. The way people thinks about science needs time to mature. Fania noticed that on herself. Initially, she had been overwhelmed by all the accumulated knowledge she now had available. That became her challenge, to bring Mother's teaching of science up to date without disrupting it. She couldn't upset the system, the teachers themselves had to be able to cope with the change. Some would undoubtedly retire, unable to adapt. But it wasn't just the process of teaching. Science relied on research and that required initiative. Budding scientists needed to feel the joy of discovery less their initiative be smothered. It was, perhaps, a sad outcome, that a lot of wonderful minds would be wasted re-inventing the wheel, but it would be their wheel, not one magically brought down from Heaven. In the long term , preserving and encouraging the process of invention was more valuable than the results of that process.

Fania's textbooks became a very important part of that change of minds. Knowing, by her own experience, what was known and how it was taught in Mother, she was able to design a path that would make them transition from their previous state of knowledge to the new one as soon as possible, but not faster, keeping and improving the good parts without breaking the structure. Evolving rather than starting anew. It might feel like revolutionary to people on Mother, which was fine, but they had to feel to be part of that revolution or, otherwise, they would not be able to handle it.

She kept updating her books every few years adding further rungs to the long ladder the students on Mother would have to climb once the earlier stages became accepted knowledge. As much as possible she credited local researchers for their discoveries rather than pulling information out of Heaven's archives and dropping it into Mother.

Actual face to face contact amongst people on both planets was still an issue. People could not travel on the cable, it took too long and rockets remained expensive. Since it was night on one planet when it was day on the other, sleepers were rarely awake at the same time and even when they could force themselves to slightly modify their sleeping habits, usually with the aid of medicines, or for insomniacs such as Fania, direct communication was a tedious affair with the two seconds delay it took for a reply to arrive. Conferences, with one speaker at a time, were somewhat easier. Most of the communication, though, was via text messages.

People in Mother were not used to typing on a keyboard. Handwriting was still the norm in Mother. The only trained typists on Mother were the telegraph operators. Though a part of their business was taken away by the commies, there was a gap in between instant voice communication and letters that they could still fill. The commies had sped up the business cycle. Consumers could reach their suppliers almost instantly but when a formal order had to be placed in writing, a letter suddenly seemed too slow. Thus, large companies started hiring telegraph operators and installing teleprinters for contracts and other formal documents. Many of them who feared they would be left jobless by the commies found themselves in well paid jobs in the private sector. Teleprinters, which earlier on were only found in post offices and railroad stations, started to become a regular sight, the difference being that they were not wired but wireless. The commies had always been able to handle text transmission but it was not enabled in the regular units. Most only had the 12 keys used for dialing and handling the call and no display for text. The displays, unlike the keyboards, speakers or microphones that were manufactured locally, had to be imported from Heaven. They were bulky, compared to the chips themselves, because they had to be large enough to be read, so they were far more expensive to transport. However, electromechanical printers had been in production in Mother for the telegraph networks so the few companies that had always built them were having a brisk business. Still, it was still too expensive and bulky for domestic use, it was only for the larger companies.

Quite a number of university researchers and professors had Fania's number in their commie listing and she regularly exchanged text messages with a lot of people on Mother. She was a very respected figure in the academic world and she was granted several honorific degrees in several universities, a rarity amongst the inhabitants of Heaven since, with such a low population, there was no formal higher academic hierarchy. Of course they had physicians, surgeons, engineers, chemists, judges and so on, but they didn't use titles or followed a prescribed career path, there was no university in Heaven. Higher education was a matter of apprenticeship, on-the-job training and self-study. Their skills were checked and certified by their peers. Students would often move to other domes to train with this or that specialist. This had the added benefit of tying together an otherwise small and sparse population and it was one more reason no university had been founded in Heaven. With their small population, they would only had been able to support one university campus, which would concentrate too much knowledge in one place. The distributed nature of the apprenticeship system suited them far better.

----

The colonies started using transparent panels when replacing the translucent, slightly brownish tiles that covered their domes, and they started actively clearing the dust that piled on them, instead of just waiting for the wind to do it.  The idea that they had to hide their domes from Mother was a long-held myth.  The original ones had been built during the war and were camouflaged as a matter of course.  The purpose, however, had been to make them invisible from orbiting or approaching hostile spacecraft, they had never been visible from Mother.  For centuries, it had been clear that the war was over but, still, Heaven kept its domes disguised uncertain of the reaction of the people on Mother towards them should a research vessel detect them.  Even as the first observers who landed on Mother reported the lack of any spacefaring capabilities, domes remained camouflaged.

Now, all of Mother knew they were there, there was no point in hiding.  Still, the fear of the outdoors remained.  The translucent domes let the light through while, at the same time, kept them sheltered from the hostile outside environment.  The people of Heaven have kept their backs turned to the world out of their domes for dozens of generations.  It was the council in one of the smaller domes that voted to use transparent tiles to replace the old ones when doing regular maintenance, as a sign of hope that their future was going to be outside.  Then, another dome voted to dedicate a plaque to those who ventured to travel to Mother to make contact possible.  The pedestal holding that plaque was on a reflecting pool and a large section of the dome was switched to transparent tiles so that Mother would actually reflect on that pond.

The society of Heaven was opening to the outside.  They started to realize that their future was going to be there, their hopes where already there, and there was lots to hope for.  Mother was now a friendly place worth watching, though only insomniacs could see it full against the night sky; for sleepers it was a faint sliver against the blue sky, but still a hopeful image.

----

Over the decades, Heaven enlarged the area dedicated to agriculture allowing them to support a larger population. With the lower cost of raw materials coming from Mother thanks to the cable, they were able to expand significantly. Several new domes were founded. Living spaces grew larger and families grew to occupy them. They had always played a delicate balance in between keeping a large enough population to ensure genetic and cultural variability but not so large that they would risk scarcity of resources to support it; in between concentrating the population in a few places that were easier to maintain and dispersing it to ensure survivability in the case that a disaster struck any location.

Population, though, wasn't growing as fast as they had envisioned, that goal post would be reached a little later than planned, but it was still on its way. Agriculture, however, was mostly automated. Its growth was limited by the resources on the ground, not the number of people working on it. Self-sustainability relied on being able to develop a complete ecological cycle and, a good part of it didn't require any attention. With their limited early resources, they could only grow the crops they absolutely needed. They couldn't devote expensive nutrients to develop wild spaces like forests and scrubland, which were an important part in the growth and upkeep of soil. Disgusting as they were, the small critters living in the ground, worms and the like, were terribly important and it was their population, not that of humans, that most influenced the self-sustainability of the ecological environment. Trees fixed the soil, preventing wind and water erosion, bacteria in the soil could break minerals in the rocks. Plants would then absorb the water and evaporate it, slowly changing the climate. Bushes resistant to saltier water also added humidity to the atmosphere. Rain would become more abundant, adding to the stock of water suitable for irrigation and pushing back the arid lands and precipitating the abrasive dust floating in the air. The greenery also unlocked the oxygen trapped in mineral oxides in the ground. As the gases in the atmosphere became thicker, the air in Heaven might even be breathable with little or no artificial equipment.

Would humans ever be able to live out in the open with no extra equipment? Would they be able to live permanently out from under the domes? Though few could categorically confirm that possibility, nobody could completely deny it. All the minerals and gases required for human life were trapped in the rocks. The threshold for plant life was close enough and they had been able to calculate it with a high degree of certainty. There was a large range of plant life so perhaps Heaven would never be able to grow, say, orchids but more and more species of edible plants could be added. After all, Heaven already had plenty of vegetable life, unfortunately, either inedible or of very low yield. Native life on Heaven had adapted to a miserly cycle of scarce resources. Contrary to the many species of plant life available to experiment with, humans were only a single species with a very demanding set of requirements. Whether Heaven would ever be able to supply those needs was still uncertain.

As a result of this expansion, the inhabitants of Heaven were doing some massive landscaping. The most favorable ground was dedicated to edibles. Land not easily accessible to harvesters was seeded for forests or scrubland, which would support the new ecosystem. There was a lot of ground moved around for roads, drainage and irrigation canals, places for storage and other support infrastructure. Unnoticed at first, some unusual things started to come out of the ground. When someone took the trouble of compiling the frequency and location of those supposedly random findings, a different picture came about. The outcome of those findings would be the basis of what was to be Fania's last article for Mother. She was already a grandmother by then and she would live many more years still, but she declared she would never be able to write anything more significant than this. To her close fiends and family she also admitted that she was bored with writing the damned articles.
