# Afterword

I love water and canals so, early on, I was sure there had to be some barges and canals in the story.  I am not thinking of those of Venice but the likes of the Canal du Midi, in France, that crosses from the English Channel to the Mediterranean though nowadays it is only used for tourism during the warmer months.  Few people realize how big the network of canals in Europe is.  Barges almost 150 meters in length can sail from the North Sea to the Black Sea via none other than Switzerland in about three weeks all year around.  Amsterdam to Istanbul in less than a month without passing through the Mediterranean.

The canal trip from Pinnacle City to Ponju, though, was modeled partly on the Canal du Midi and part on Bruges, Belgium.  The canals within Pinnacle City, in my imagination, resemble those of Bruges and Amsterdam.  The rest of the canal is pure Midi, including the tunnel of Malpas, near Colombiers, France.  The idea of someone pushing a barge by walking upside down on the roof of the tunnel comes from a canal somewhere in England I heard about, though I have not seen it myself.  You can't do that on the Malpas tunnel, its roof is too high.  English barges are much smaller than continental ones and everything there is on a similar scale.

Any of the towns along the Canal du Midi could serve as a model for the port at Ponju or any of the many along the way.  The port at Carcassonne, right by its railroad station  or the one at Beziers, close by though not connected to it, could serve as the basis for the port and railroad station of Banglion, though the red brick color is that of the bridges crossing the Tarn in Albi.

I've seen barges being guided by someone making signals from the bow in Suzhou, China.  Whole families lived on board and it was usual in large barges to see a woman or a teenager at the bow making signals to a man at the wheel who could not see the traffic ahead.  I admit that the images I see of Suzhou canals in the web do not resemble the ones I'd seen but they are fitting to the prosperous country China has turned into, they don't seem to carry as much bulk cargo as they did back then, at least not through the city itself.

Many would assume Pinnacle itself is modeled after Mont Saint Michel in France.  That is not the case, I've never been anywhere close to it, I've just seen pictures of it and it is not like it.  First, it is not build all the way to the top, Pinnacle's buildings are mostly around its base, most of the rest is forest.  It has a very ample access road with impressive gates, mostly decorative, not defensive at all, with the Great Temple right after the main esplanade and is relatively well-integrated to the city, linked by a permanent causeway that does not rely on tides to be crossed and continues into Elvar Boulevard for several blocks into the city. By the way, tides are unknown in Mother since Heaven is fixed in the sky.

The idea of a cable structure reaching outer space or *space elevator* is far from new.  One of the authors who used it was my favorite SciFi author, Arthur C. Clarke and in his memory, I dropped a reference to a techno-fantasy story about a cable anchored in the fictitious island of Taprobane, as in Clarke's own novel The Fountains of Paradise.  His space elevator, though, is much shorter.  An Earth space elevator needs to reach about 50 thousand kilometers, that is, past geostationary orbit up to a balancing counterweight at the other end.  The bigger the counterweight, the shorter the segment beyond geostationary orbit.  In this novel, the cable had to go all the way to the other planet, a distance we may assume close to that of the Moon, lets say 400 thousand kilometers, 8 times longer.   That is also one reason passenger travel is almost out of the question on such a cable.  A trip to Earth's geostationary orbit (36km) in a space elevator would take about a week.  Heaven would be about 12 times farther from Mother, thus, it would take about 3 months.  Compare that to about 3 Earth days for the same trip on a rocket.  So I made the cable carry only cargo at a more safer and economic speed, taking 6 months for each trip.

I should explain about days in Mother and Heaven.  Right now, the Earth rotation is slowing down and its day getting longer due to the Moon influence.  The Moon is already tidally locked to the Earth; it is a matter of relative weight, the Moon has already lost that fight, but that is not the final word on the matter, the Moon is still slowing down the Earth and, eventually, the Earth will only show one face to the Moon as the Moon does to the Earth and both will be fixed in each other's sky.

Heaven and Mother, being of more or less the same size, have called it a tie long ago.  They both slowed down to the point that they face each other and, just as with the Moon, its day and month are the same.  I assumed a Mother/Heaven day to be about the same as a Moon day/month, that is, about an Earth lunar month.  In other words, daylight in Mother lasts two Earth weeks and so does its night.  People there don't remain awake all during the day, they take naps, short and long ones, with meals in between.  Short naps, like a *siesta* is optional.  The time in between two long naps is a journey as travelers would camp for long naps and, thus, count that as a journey.

So, to make it simple, a journey is about an Earth day, a day in Mother is about two weeks of daylight and two weeks of night.  The year is about the same, made of little more than 12 day/night cycles.

What I skipped over is that sunrise and sunset do not occur on all the inhabited continent of Mother at once.  By the time sunrise is happening in the westernmost longitudes of that continent, night is almost arriving on the easternmost part.  When Pinnacle is waking up, those in the far east are halfway through the day.  The midday eclipse only happens at midday along the latitude of Pinnacle, it would be an evening event in the east and an early morning one in the west.

On Earth, the passengers of the Concorde were able to fly fast enough to remain ahead of the setting sun when traveling west for example from London to NYC.  In Mother, a train departing early in the morning from the far east would be able to cross to the far west and always remain in the local 'early morning'.  At that point, the crew would be falling asleep while the locals at the western terminus would be waking up.

None of this was even suggested in the novel, where day and night seem to happen simultaneously in all of each of the planets, except for Allucio's observations which describe the terminator advancing on the surface of Heaven.  It would have only added confusion and, after all, at any time, a half of our own Earth is in daytime while the other is in nighttime and we just deal with it so we might assume our imaginary inhabitants do likewise.

If here on Earth we make such a fuzz about the Moon, I imagined that having a much larger celestial body up there, always in the same position should have a much stronger cultural impact.  If gods have always inhabited an ethereal heaven up there in the sky, what if you had something more tangible?  Thus, the abode of the gods was born.

Most people hibernate during the night.  I thought that people with such long periods of night should adapt to that in interesting ways, either culturally, say by reserving certain tasks for the night, or physiologically.  I opted for the latter. At some point I though about explaining their hibernation by a genetic change artificially induced on them to be able to survive long space trips in hibernation which, later, once Mother got colonized, served them to adapt to its long nights.  That, of course, would hint at a far away origin for them but, in the end, that idea had no place in the story and I dropped it. Hibernation simply happens.

If anyone wonders why there is a sort of matriarchy in Mother, I wonder that myself.  I don't know, it just came up so I just went with it.  It is, in fact, a mixed system with matriarchy at the local and household level and a male priesthood at the global level.

What about each of the characters?  I really don't have a clue.  They just showed up and I allowed them to enter the story.  I didn't plan for any Fania and she ended having the last word.  Anisia also popped up and ended up starring along Allucio, marrying him and having baby Anrich. The image of him watching the barges pass underneath the footbridge over the basin at Banglion is that of my son, then a little boy, perched on an overpass, watching trains pass underneath.

The numbers on the physics in the novel are quite questionable, anyone doing the numbers with proper data would certainly cry in despair.  I just used numbers close to existing things in the real world but I admit they might not work when all of it is put together.  Sorry about that.  I tried to get the physics right qualitatively, I hope I got that more or less correct.  I tried to avoid *earthly* references as much as possible but I found no way to refer to the Coriolis effect in any other way without being too verbose. The mirrors providing concentrated sunlight to the pods on the cable orbit in Lagrange points, but I was able to avoid using that earthly name since the explanation given was enough.

I made the technical dialogs short and quite informal.  Usually science fiction flicks have lots of people giving orders and reporting to each other. It is a handy trick to fill screen time and, through the voices of the characters, make viewers feel the tension and importance of the moment. I believe this would not really happen in the future. With everyone having access to the very same information and telemetry in their screens, it would be redundant. Reporting happens in the bridge of a ship but it is often because not all information is available to everyone everywhere.  However, when the person following the map in the passenger seat says 'turn right', the driver does not report 'turning', everyone feels it happening right away.  With information available to everyone and with computers in control, with suitable preset defaults, there is little need for verbalizing much.

----

The cover image is an actual picture of the Miroir d'eau, a fountain in downtown Nice, France, taken by my wife. With the sky and the clouds reflected in the water and the joints in the tiles beneath looking like cables criss-crossing the sky, I thought this was the cover image I needed.

----

Please follow the Facebook page for this novel at:
https://www.facebook.com/TheGodsThatWerent.
I regularly post to that page, including pictures of places that served as inspiration for some of the locations described in the novel.
