# Epilogue - Fania's Last Article

Dear reader

I'm back from a very curious and somewhat unsettling meeting with some good friends of mine, renowned scientists all of them. About five years ago, one of them, Cormis, received from Guimo, a student of his, a map with reported incidents of damage to plows and other agricultural or earth-moving equipment. This was quite standard stuff, with so much virgin ground available for crops, it would be silly to keep working on rocky ground were you get your equipment damaged. The tough ground was reported, marked, avoided and forgotten about. Then came the surprise, a second map showing incidents with seemingly artificial, man-made, objects showed an unusually large number of them in a few areas.

We occasionally find man-made objects in the ground. Some of them are ours -after all these years, Fania had adopted the 'we' to refer to people of Heaven-. We've been traveling the same paths for centuries now and we have not always been careful about picking up our waste when we leave camp. We also know there have been minor colonies or sometimes simple refuges since before the Great Collapse. Yes, we do have ruins here from before the War. We rebuilt the major domes once the population numbers recovered. If anything, the devastation here was worst than in Mother, at least in relative numbers. As we occupy more and more of this planet, we expect to find at least one abandoned dome we believe should be somewhere out there and possibly a few more smaller structures. Our records also have their holes. The early survivors were not able to save it all.

Perhaps one of these patches with high numbers of man-made debris was the lost dome, perhaps there had been more domes than we knew about? The agricultural technicians working in the field usually dismiss these objects as nuisance. Natural or manufactured, if there are too many of them, they just move to easier ground elsewhere. Nobody had ever bothered to collect any of them or compile their locations, until Guimo compiled his map. My friend Cormis contacted a nearby station for them to collect a few of these debris and send them to him, which they did. The technicians reported that it had not been hard for them to find man-made debris and that they had only sent a few of the many available, the ones that seemed less damaged.

They looked like bricks, though they were not the size or shape of the bricks we produce. They had assumed they were made from compacted soil with some chemical binding agent, as we still use for some masonry work. However, in the chemistry lab where they tested it, they found they were actually clay bricks, fired in a kiln fed with charcoal. This was quite astonishing. None of the domes had any clay bricks. You could compact and bind almost any kind of soil which was much easier than prospecting for the right kind of clay to make bricks. With the proper equipment and chemical resins, it was easier and safer to do bricks of compacted soil than firing a kiln. Mostly we don't use individual bricks. Walls are usually made by automated equipment on caterpillar tracks that extrude a continuous layer of ground soil and binding resin. Bricks are only used in corners or around holes for doors or any other irregular shape that the automated machine cannot handle and, anyway, those bricks are made of the same material.

Finally, burning charcoal is unknown in Heaven. The scrubby native vegetation doesn't make good firewood. No native plant raises more than a meter above the ground so it never has any need to develop sturdy trunks, hence, no wood. A further mystery was an imprint on one of the bricks. It seems that a piece of charcoal had pressed against the still soft brick and left the mark of the rings of the tree it had come from. Extending those segments into full circles, it seemed the trunk they had come from was at least 20cm in diameter. No such thing has ever been seen in Heaven.

Could the bricks had come from Mother? Could the clay be local and the charcoal had come from Mother? Clay is used in Heaven  mostly for art pieces and it is baked in electrical ovens. But these bricks didn't seem to have any artistic purpose and natural charcoal is unaffordable in Heaven. The imprint was real, it was not drawn, there was carbon residue in the grooves. This demanded further investigation.

After ensuring the resources to do further exploration of the site, Cormis and Guimo went to the station closest to the site and visited the place. Nobody had dug the site, the bricks had been stumbled upon when leveling the ground or plowing thus barely scratching the surface. What could be found digging deeper? They carried equipment to find out, simple, old-fashioned pickaxes and shovels. They tried to look for bricks in areas that seemed undisturbed by the earlier leveling and plowing. They started probing the ground with holes which proved of little use. While having a meal in the roving vehicle, one of the agricultural technicians suggested carving narrow trenches instead of deep round holes, which would allow them to sample a larger area with less effort. They did so after the meal and after a few hours of work they found a clump of bricks in an undisturbed patch of ground. They excavated in that patch and about a meter down, they found a brick wall. There seemed to be dozens of bricks in that wall. As they dug along the wall, they found it kept going and it even branched off at right angles perhaps enclosing rooms. They were now estimating hundreds of bricks. While two teams dug along the wall in opposite directions, another team starting digging deep. The wall seemed to be a little over a meter and a half in height, or at least that is what remained of it. As the teams digging along the wall found, the height varied and the top of the wall didn't seem to be intentionally finished, rather, it seemed to be what remained of a taller wall, somehow chopped off at that height.

Guimo, who had been in the team that dug deep, noticed the pattern of the bricklaying changed in the bottom third. By now he was betting to himself that this was the wall of a room and, if so, it should not only have walls but also a ceiling and a floor. The ceiling was probably gone with the top part of the walls, but what about the floor? Could that change in the bricklaying signal the floor? Perhaps he had dug on the outside. What if he dug on the other side of the wall, would he find a floor on that side? He immediately started digging on the other side and, indeed, they found the floor. It was time for a meal and a long nap by then. They discussed their findings over dinner. They had the rover and the technicians on loan until the next meal, they could not excavate much more. Someone suggested digging probing trenches every few meters in line with the walls they had already unearthed. How far apart? They couldn't agree. Some said they had found a whole colony and the wall would go on for hundreds of meters. Others said it was just a few rooms. The former wanted to dig a trench about twenty meters away, the later just three meters away. In a sort of bet amongst them, they decided to do both things. Both teams hit the wall, meaning, the wall was big. They decided to dig another probing trench thirty meters further away, and they hit the wall as well. The same thing going in the other direction. Clearly, this was a big discovery, too big to handle with plain shovels. Anyway, the agricultural team had to return with their rover so it would have to be at a later time.

It took the rest of the day to discuss what they would need and to arrange it. The communicators were buzzing with the news. Scientists were either suggesting things to do or volunteering to go there themselves. Several groups converged on the agricultural station near the site and from there, they continued over to the excavation. The first group arrived in a dirigible balloon loaded with all sorts of cameras and remote sensors. Their pictures showed very subtle changes in color where the known wall was. It often happens that whatever is buried contains minerals that are slightly different from the surrounding soil, or they hold more or less moisture and, if it is not too deep, they show in very subtle differences of coloration in the plants or soil on the surface. But it doesn't help much until you know what color or shade you are looking for. Once they had a sample, though, it was easy to find more of the same differences. Furthermore, the walls were straight, showing as parallel lines, though mineral strata often do that, but they also crossed each other at right angles, which nature rarely does. By the time the other teams arrived, they had transmitted the location of a few places far from one another to excavate and, thus, confirm their findings.

Another team arrived with a seismographic system. It was designed to map deep into the ground looking for distinctive rock formations propitious for certain mineral deposits or underground water. They left the heavy trailer they had pulled behind their rover parked close by and started planting about half a dozen sensors at different locations in and around the site. They then turned on the trailer which retracted its wheels, laying on a thick plate on its belly. It started to vibrate and, at times, to virtually jump. Since they couldn't wait for an actual earthquake, they were producing their own small tremor with the jumping trailer. The various sensors detected the delay and intensity of those tremors, which gave them a sense of what kind of material they had traveled through. After a few minutes, they stopped and the trailer extended its wheels back again. They pulled it to another location and repeated the process. After the third time they did so, an image of what lay underground started to suggest itself. As they added observations with the trailer at other spots, the picture got sharper and, though it didn't match exactly, it coincided quite closely with the one from the balloon. Each system had its blind spots so they complemented each other.

By that time, the findings of the balloon had already been confirmed. Four out of the five probing digs they had suggested had been successful. It was good they had not started digging holes blindly, the site covered an area of about half kilometer on each side, it would have taken days, if not years, to uncover. The original wall seemed to be the front facade of several consecutive houses in front of a main road. Had they made a continuous dig along the wall they would have found a cross street; their digs just happened to be on two consecutive city blocks.

Of course everyone was very excited by the discovery. The combined images produced both by the aerial and seismic sensors provided an impressive picture of the magnitude of their discovery. But they realized they didn't really know how to handle it. In one of the probing holes they realized that in searching for the bricks they had broken the plaster that covered them. They couldn't just blunder their way through this, inadvertently destroying part of it. Someone mentioned that there had been a science called archeology and that there probably was something in the archives about how to handle this discovery properly.

This happened three years ago. I wanted to convey to you, my dear reader, the excitement of the finding. In the meantime, we learned how to carefully excavate and preserve our findings and we have discovered two more cities. Once we learned what we should be looking for, they were easy to spot. It is clear that none of them are full cities. They abruptly end at creeks or cliffs which seem to cut through them or changes in the terrain which left part of it preserved for us to see and other parts to be washed away or eroded over the centuries.

Extrapolating their size from what we found, they were quite large, barely smaller than our biggest domes though with a much lower density, simple flat houses without higher stories, many of them including gardens, open air gardens. In fact, none of the cities had any means of holding a breathable atmosphere, it seems their inhabitants were able to live out in the open.

We found a few bodies in the first ruins, then we found a cemetery and when we analyzed the remains we found they were just like us. The soft tissues were completely gone, we couldn't expect to find any lungs or heart, but the skeletons found are just like our own so we know the size of their hearts and lungs and even their noses and they are just like ours. There is little doubt that they are our ancestors and they didn't show any particular adaptation to our atmosphere. However, if they could breathe it, does it mean that it was breathable? Has it ever been breathable? When?.

We analyzed their household items, a few we found complete, most were just shards and fragments. We found just the imprints of metals long oxidized and gone. They seemed to have furniture made of wood, in a planet were there is no wood, not for making furniture, nor for turning it into charcoal to fire clay bricks. However, it was there, the imprint in hardened soil of furniture made of wood, its grain clearly visible, that has disintegrated and left an empty hollow in the ground.

We also found signs of a large volume of trade. Similar items in faraway places. They seemed to indicate a widely connected society trading over long distances. A single culture spread over the continent. However it is impossible to trade and share a single culture in between a few towns or cities so widely apart. To support trading you need trading routes and inhabited places along them. We started looking for them. And found them. Many of them, of all sizes. Some of them large cities. As large as the largest cities in Mother or even larger.

We have no records of any inhabitation in Heaven before the colonies established by space travelers from Mother just before and during the Great War. We have the records of the earliest colonies. They describe a planet just as we see it today, dry, with low, hardy vegetation, an atmosphere too thin to breathe.

We found mechanisms to date the objects we found. We estimate seven thousand years. Earlier than the oldest settlements known in Mother. At that time, our earliest ancestors were mostly nomadic herders and just a few of them were settling down, domesticating animals and planting seeds for growing crops.

When we added together all our findings, we realized the tragedy they conveyed. The first towns we found were nothing more than small, faraway towns and villages, completely isolated from the main urban centers. That is the only reason that so much of them was still in one piece. Everything else had been destroyed, not disintegrated by time, not worn out by erosion or washed away by floods. All the larger cities and towns had been destroyed by war. Bombed, burned, abandoned.

We realized they had their own Great War and an even Greater Collapse, but theirs went beyond the edge. They died, they killed not only themselves. They utterly destroyed their planet, they broke the life cycle that kept the planet alive. Their forests had burned down, their crops died, their animals famished. Many might have adapted to eat the scrubby plants that exist to this day, but the atmosphere also thinned out. With little greenery to renew the oxygen, the air became too thin to breathe at a rate faster than the higher animals could evolve to adapt. With no plants to transpire and add moisture to the air and no roots to hold the soil together the deserts grew.

Our religious scriptures tell the story of our earliest ancestors descending from Heaven, an experiment by the Gods who gave us the new world to sow and to inhabit, or a test they put us through for their entertainment as some would have it. Religious scholars put a date to that, about seven thousand years. Biologist dispute our heavenly origin, they have always said we must have evolved over millions of years, just as the rest of our animals and plants have done. However, they failed to find any early ancestors to our own species. The religious scholars always said they were none to be found, the Gods brought us from Heaven as we are. It seems, they were right, except that the Gods were ourselves. Fortunately for those first colonists, who probably were part of an experiment and did experiment themselves, Mother was teeming with life and when they were cut off from their home planet, they were able to survive and prosper. We have been able to trace the origin of much of the life on Mother to earlier lifeforms, but not that of ourselves because our biological ancestry is buried here in Heaven, not in Mother, along with a rich ecology which we are just beginning to trace. Only the lowest and sturdiest lifeforms survived the destruction of this planet and we are now literally scratching the surface of its past.

Yes, they were our ancestors and we almost repeated their story. In the last days of their civilization they settled on their twin planet and when the war killed them all, their colonies in their twin planet survived and developed into the society that, at the height of their technological prowess, almost exterminated itself again. But they, our ancestors, were spared, and so was their colony. Yes, us, both Mother and Heaven, we both survived. Hopefully, to learn from our earlier, repeated mistakes.

Shall we live in peace, this time, forever.
