# 8 - The Rocket Launch

In the cafeteria, Anisia had the fruit juices and hot drinks ready for the sleepers waking up. They started to show up, all still groggy and somewhat stiff and debilitated from the night. Hunger wouldn't catch up with them until later. At first, liquids was the thing. She was happy to listen to all the stories and any gossip she could get after being alone for more than half the night, since the boat had left. She had exchanged some messages with Heaven, because nighttime on Mother was daytime on Heaven and the guys up there were pretty busy sending job orders and other things to do as soon as the Island became functional again. She even had a couple of voice connections with a few of her friends though the three second round trip delay prevented any fluid conversation. That was an extra bonus of her being an insomniac. During the night there were less radio-traffic restrictions because there was few people awake in Mother who might also be playing with radio transmission, so the chances of detection were deemed insignificant. Sleepers could not benefit from that. Anyway, nobody on Mother would be able to listen to the contents of the transmission itself. The primitive analog radio equipment of the best hobbyist could not decipher the bursts of encoded digital signals that Heaven's hardware used. They simply didn't want to get anyone on Mother wondering about strange sources of electromagnetic noise, as they would surely call it.

She had driven to the coast to pick up the remaining pallets shortly before sunrise. There had never been an accident in the Island but since she was completely alone, it was too risky to go around with no possibility of being rescued. If the truck didn't start when she was on the port, it might mean a 20 hour walk back to base. Shortly before sunrise, however, if anything happened to her, the sleepers waking up the earliest could go for her.

There was no urgent need to go and fetch the rest of the pallets, but she was thoroughly bored by then. She packed to have a picnic on a high cliff overlooking the ocean, close to the port. Heaven was a waning crescent in the sky. Its light didn't compete with that of the faraway stars but it still provided enough light to move about. The air was chilly but there wasn't much of a wind. Overall, it was the best conditions she could hope for to be outdoors during the night. She stayed out for about an hour, taking a snack and drinking hot tea from the thermos bottle while enjoying the view. The breeze got stronger so she returned to the cabin of the truck and probably dozed off a little while. The rest of the trip was plain routine, loading the pallets and driving back to the base where she left the truck parked in the loading bay without bothering to unload.

The preparations for the rocket launches wouldn't start until everyone was available. The early risers would usually deal with more mundane tasks, preparing breakfast being one of them. You couldn't start with the rockets until all or at least most of the specialists were available. There would be two rockets during the day, the regular cargo rocket and the manned one. During the night, Heaven had sent the manifest for each of those based on their needs and what the Farm had shipped to the Island, which Anisia had reported as arrived without losses.

The manned rocket was the one that required more attention to make sure it was safe for its precious human cargo. Valuable as they were to support the growth of plant life on Heaven, nobody would cry for the worms in the topsoil of the cargo rocket if it blew up or crashed; human passengers, however, were quite another matter. The manned rocket was slightly larger than a regular cargo rocket though it carried half the payload. You could almost blast inert matter or even worms and microbes without crushing them. Manned rockets required a much gentler acceleration if you wanted your passengers to suffer no harm. That meant the rocket took much longer to reach orbit consuming lots of fuel in doing so, plus the fuel to carry that extra fuel and the fuel to carry that extra extra and so on. Then there was the air, the water and the food for the passengers. All these were reduced by letting the passengers hibernate. Since the day/night cycle was completely opposed in Heaven and Mother, travelers had to adjust their sleeping habits. This was facilitated with some drugs that could trigger hibernation earlier.

Launches were done several hours before sunset so the ground crew would be awake, but the passengers were already in induced hibernation. Arrival would be early in the morning of Heaven with the passengers still hibernating. The capsule carried no food or water for sleepers and air consumption was reduced and the capsule had little living space since the passengers would not even leave their couches. Insomniacs were quite another matter, they had to travel alone so they would have all the capsule as living space for the journey. Besides eating and drinking, a single insomniac would breath 4 times as much as three sleepers would in the same trip just by being awake. And there was the 'waste management' issue. With sleepers, if nothing comes in, nothing comes out. Enough said.

Just as a capsule launched close to sunset in Mother would arrive early after sunrise on Heaven, passengers from Heaven arrived at Mother in the early morning. There was, indeed, a capsule due that morning. Control of the capsule had been transferred from Heaven to Mother as soon as the ground crew at Mother was ready. Only an insomniac remained at Heaven' control room by then just to have someone keeping an eye on the telemetry, the transit being so uneventful. The trajectory had been corrected at the half way point but it was all calculated and handled by the computers at Heaven. The ground crew at Mother simply checked that the capsule was in the right trajectory and properly oriented with its heat-shield pointing forward.

The capsule could not go straight down to the Island, it would have been too steep a descent. It would have to swing by Mother doing half an orbit before reentering the atmosphere while on the far side. Neither the base station on Heaven nor the Island would have contact with the capsule while on the far side, the on-board computer would have to manage everything on its own. For half an hour, nobody would know anything about the capsule. As the time came for the capsule to appear from behind the horizon, everyone in the control room was holding their breath and so were the many off-duty people who waited behind the glass partitions. The signal arrived a couple of seconds earlier than the estimated time, well within the safe range.

The capsule could glide as much as a piano falling from a skyscraper but it did have some steering capability. The trajectory of the capsule would vary depending on atmospheric conditions, wind, air density and temperature. As soon as the on-board computer and the ground computer got in touch with each other and started exchanging telemetry, the course of the capsule could be corrected. The capsule was already on the third and largest set of the drag parachutes, the ones that helped it reduce its ground speed, while providing some steering by selectively bleeding air through flaps of cloth on the sides. Now it was time to release the main landing set, three large parachutes that would carry the capsule safely to the ground. The rescue crew was ready, waiting the order to go to the landing site, an open plain with no big obstacles that could damage the capsule or its precious human contents on touchdown. It took no time for that order to arrive, the capsule was on a good trajectory.

The capsule with its huge parachutes was easy to track by sight even against the glare of early morning sun. The recovery team arrived barely seconds after touchdown. The capsule had just released the lines linking it to the parachutes so as not to be dragged by a strong wind. A team went to recover them as the breeze was carrying them away. The rest went for the capsule. The capsule had landed upright or, at least, close enough to make no difference. The flat bed truck with the loading crane approached it and as soon as it stopped someone on the ground was extending its legs and unfolding the hydraulic arm. The capsule was still hot from the re-entry so one of the crew was in an insulating suit so as to be able to get near it. He placed a ladder on the side and climbed to secure the hook of the crane into the lifting eyebolt of the capsule. Once that was safely attached, he came down and fixed guiding lines to the bottom. The capsule was then raised, placed on a cradle on the truck and tied down. Finally, they all climbed into their vehicles and returned to base. By then, the capsule would have cooled down and it would be fine to open it. The passengers were hibernating so they weren't anxious to come out, there was no need to rush.

On reaching the base, the truck backed into the docking bay of the rocket assembly building. Once unloaded and with wheels attached to its cradle, the capsule was literally showered, to take the dirt out and finally cool it down. The hatch was opened and after the physician checked the passengers, a technician came in and detached the harness holding the passengers to the couches and fixed the loops in the front of that same harness to a lifting arm that would take the passengers out, one at a time, through the hatch and onto the stretchers that would carry them to the same room Jobas and Marlo had spend the night in.

The doctor would do some tests on them and, if all was fine, he would inject them with a series of drugs to trigger the natural waking response of the organism. Left on its own, the body took too long to adjust to such a sudden change in the day/night cycle and in all that time, the individual felt strange and somewhat sick since not all body functions adjusted at the same speed. Some people would need half a year to adjust completely to such a change. With the drugs, the process was cut to a third, a mere couple of days. The doctor had to do blood tests regularly during the adjustment period and adjust the doses of the injected drugs to prevent the body, or some organs within it, from falling back to its original cycle. A person might fail to feel hungry while the muscles consumed the energy reserves of the body. Another person might look pale as the body kept preventing the blood from reaching the skin, as it normally does when hibernating to prevent the loss of body heat. Drowsiness was by far the most common issue so passengers adjusting their day/night cycle might not be assigned to do anything were a distraction could harm someone.

The reverse happened during the night, the body of a recently arrived passenger might send the wrong signals and try to awaken itself. Anisia, who would travel back to the Farm along them, would monitor their forced hibernation and dose them in consultation with a physician on duty on Heaven. An organ that had not shut down properly might harm itself if it didn't get the oxygen and nutrients to work properly and would poison itself in its own waste if not evacuated. This was the crucial part of the adjustment. If the passenger could hibernate during the night, at sunrise he or she would wake up and be better adjusted. A little monitoring during the morning was done to ensure everything was fine, which usually was.

----

The cargo rocket would be the first to be launched. The cargo it would carry had to be packed into suitable containers for the trip, weighted and sealed. The topsoil was mostly organic matter without any sand or pebbles so it was a spongy wet mass quite disgusting in look and smell with squiggly things trying to come out. The worms were actually a very minor part of all the ecosystem packed in it but they were the most visible part, so it was all called 'the worms'. It had to be watered to reach the optimum moisture for the trip and nutrients added. Then, it had to be compressed to the proper density so it would take the least space while, at the same time, the worms and other insects would not be crushed and could survive the trip. The blast of the launch did not affect their soft bodies as long as they were in a medium wet enough as to almost float in it. The pharmaceuticals were mostly in powder form, compressed into sealed, sterile containers ready to be shipped. The ones that required a controlled temperature would be send later that day in the manned capsule which was better prepared to keep a stable temperature for its living passengers.

While the cargo was being packed in a room in the work area of the Island, the engines were being prepared in a shed a short distance away, separated from the main complex by a low hill and downwind relative to the prevailing winds. The solid fuel was very stable, it was usually molded and machined to fit the booster casing. You could hammer it or saw it and, as long as it didn't reach a certain quite high temperature, it was as safe as a brick, but it still contained lots of power and, unlikely as it was, if it caught fire, it was too dangerous. The cryogenic plant, which was completely automated, was separate from both the base and the rest of the fuel. It was always running, day and night, condensing oxygen, hydrogen and other gases from the air and storing them in well insulated containers to be loaded into the upper stage of the rockets prior to launch. Those gases were the only materials produced locally at the Island, the bulk of the solid fuels were produced in factories which they owned on Mother that sold most of its output for regular industrial uses. Very little, in weight terms, came from Heaven.

The cargo rocket was in the last stages of assembly. The solid-fuel booster was already attached to the second hybrid stage and the cargo section was being attached at the end. It was all laying horizontally on its transport cradle. It didn't have any particular color, the outside skin was translucent graphite cloth and they simply dulled the color of whatever they were enclosing. There was no point in flying paint to orbit so only the cargo and control sections got a shiny white coating to reflect the heat of the sun away from its contents. Once everything was secured together and connected, a hand-held terminal plugged to the on-board computer would run a bunch of tests and when they passed, the whole was covered with a large sheet of plastic to keep it clean while being moved. The large door opened, a tractor backed up to the pulling shaft and got attached to the wheeled cradle and it soon was on its way. A long way, in time if not in distance. The road was well leveled and the cradle's suspension took care of any possible bumps but such a load had to be moved with utmost caution and care. Technicians walked in front and to the sides of the cradle occasionally kicking out some pebble or picking any debris from the road.

The airship was ready in the launching pad, tied down from its sides all along its length high enough so the rocket could roll underneath. Being unloaded, the mooring lines were holding it down, otherwise the airship would fly away. The segments of the telescoping shed that protected it while parked had all been rolled to the bow, were the main connections were attached to the tip of the airship via the mooring mast. The cryogenic tanks had been purged of air and then filled with hydrogen to be burned in the engines and used in later stages of the flight. The gas cells providing lift had been filled while the shed was closed, to make it easy to detect any possible leak.

The airship was a cylinder 150 meters long and 5 stories high with its ends tapered to a point. Two curved beams run along its sides about one third its height. All the equipment was either attached directly to those beams or hung from them, such as the mooring lines and, soon, the rocket. The control cabin, with all the auxiliary equipment such as pumps and electronics were at the bow, where the two beams converged into the tip. Two stubby wings projected at either side of the cabin. The steerable engines with its propellers were in nacelles along its sides and the large engine and propeller was at the stern, along with the steering fins. The airship was translucent as the graphite envelope was extremely thin and the gas inside was completely invisible. Some of the joints in the gas cells and a few of the reinforcements were barely visible so the control cabin and the engine at the other end of the two bow-like beams seemed to be enclosing a soap bubble.

Two technicians were waiting to ensure the tractor was coming straight, in line with the airship and that it stopped at the right spot. One of them was holding the umbilical cable hanging from the airship, which he immediately attached to the rocket as the other unlatched the tractor and signaled its driver to go.

"Cargo to ground," called the cargo chief in the airship to the loading supervisor on its desk by the rocket, "Rocket is now connected and running tests."

The cargo chief had several cameras watching the cargo from different angles. The ground supervisor acknowledged via audio and also with a thumbs up to the nearest camera. They both had the same views on their screens.

The supervisor switched to the checklist view and cried aloud "Lifting lines, number 1."

The lifting lines hanging from the airship were loosely attached to rails on the ground on either side of the rocket, numbered and color coded. All six technicians went each to the number one line of his or her assigned color. They took it, made a last visual inspection and fastened it to the rocket.

"Number 1 blue, attached", cried one of them soon followed by the rest in the prearranged order.

"Number 2", ordered the supervisor when the last one had reported success. And so it was repeated for each and every line. The lifting lines, as well as the mooring ones were also graphite threads so thin that they could go right through flesh and bone so they were sheathed in several layers of material to make them safe to handle.

"Release the rocket from the cradle," ordered the supervisor after the lifting lines were all attached. Each of the technicians had 4 to 6 latches to release. Each reported as soon as the last one was clear.

"Raising! Watch the lines", said the supervisor while turning on the windlasses holding each mooring line. The airship started to raise very slowly and the lifting lines went taut. Each of the technicians reported when all lines in their set had lost their slack. The supervisor stopped the windlasses, "Stopped. Check the lines", he said. The technicians plucked each of the lines.

"Blue lines tight", cried the first, followed by the rest shortly after.

"Raising! Watch the suspension, keep an eye on the lines". As the airship raised, it was taking more of the weight of the rocket from the transport cradle and the suspension of the wheels was stretching. When they didn't go any further it meant the rocket was no longer weighting on the cradle.

"Green is free", cried the technicians in whichever order it happened. It was usually the front end the first to raise. He was soon followed by the rest.

Each of the lifting lines had a strain gauge in its attachment to the beams on the side of the airship. They were all connected to the console of the cargo chief and they all looked as taking their fair share of the weight. He reported that to the ground supervisor, who had switched to see that same screen.

He sped up the windlasses to clear the cradle as soon as possible. The wind was calm and the airship was held both down and also sideways to prevent, as much as possible, any movement, but a sudden strong gust was always a possibility. They didn't move the cradle away just in case they had to abort the operation.

If the mooring lines were to be released, the airship would jump into the air, which was not a good idea. To prevent that, when the mooring lines were fully out the directional ducted propellers on the sides were all turned to push down and then started. As they caught up speed, the mooring lines went slack. When all the strain gauges in the windlasses showed they weren't pulling any longer, all the mooring lines were detached and finally the main anchor point at the mooring tower at the bow was released. The ducted propellers were slowly turned to push the airship backwards, away from the mooring tower at the bow and the airship was allowed to raise. When it was far enough and above the folded shed, the main propeller was started and the ducted fans turned to push the airship up and ahead. The shape of the airship and its small wings provided some lift when going forward, which could be further increased with the bow tilted slightly up. There were two groups of lines going from the front and the rear of the rocket, diagonally, to the airship. By pulling on those, the rocket could be moved towards either end. By shifting it slightly back, the weight of the rocket made the airship tilt upwards.

It took almost an hour to climb above the nominal height of the clouds. There were no clouds at the moment, but that height usually signaled the end of the more turbulent layers of the atmosphere. At that altitude, the natural buoyancy of the airship was reached. To go any further they needed to deploy the extra balloons. Airships need to be robust to fly in the lower atmosphere but that adds weight. However, once above the turbulence and in thin air, it could deploy extra, very flimsy balloons, that could not have survived in the lower atmosphere. The extra balloons were packed in pods on the sides of the airship with one end firmly attached to the main beams.

There were six balloons, three on either side. All the engines were stopped to ensure the balloons would not get caught in the airstream. Six pilot balloons were released and inflated with hydrogen from the cryogenic tanks. Then, the main balloons were released, pulled up by the pilot balloons. They were all extremely thin, fragile and completely transparent. Three of them were attached to longer lines, alternating with the shorter ones, so as to avoid bumping into each other. A little hydrogen was released into the main balloons to help their deployment. When they were fully extended, more hydrogen was released into them. They would not inflate completely, not at this height, barely a quarter of their capacity was filled but, as the whole airship raised and the atmosphere thinned more and more, that hydrogen would expand to take up all the space in the balloons.

The airship started to rise once again since now it had a little more than twice the original volume of gas. They turned the engines back on. They would soon be useless since the propellers would have less and less air to get a grip on, but they still had to go south to be as close to the equator as possible so the rotation of Mother would add a few hundreds of kilometers per hour to the speed of the rocket. When the instruments signaled they had reached the point where the engines were useless, they turned them off and they simply drifted and climbed passively.

An hour later, they had reached launch altitude. The balloons were fully inflated, big upside-down teardrops, almost round at the top. Launch preparations were ready, they had had nothing else to do during the ascent but to check that everything was fine. They had to point the rocket eastward. Since the rudder was useless at that point, they turned the engines on one side forward while leaving the others pointing backward. They switched them on to make the airship turn on itself and then kept them on automatic to ensure they stayed in that orientation. The air was thin, but enough for the propellers to get a minimal grip for maneuvering.

When stabilized in that orientation, they had nothing else to do but launch, which they did. The bolts on the rocket were hollow and had small explosives inside. They were all triggered and got cut. Just in case, a second signal was automatically sent to all the bolts after a few milliseconds to a second charge in each of the bolts. If the bolt got cut in the first attempt, the signal would not reach the charge, if it didn't, then, on this second attempt, it should. Even then, any line that could possibly remain would not be able to hold its weight and would break, though it might do so anywhere along its length and the loose ends lash around dangerously. When properly cut, the bottom end, weighted down by the coupler, was unable to reach and damage the airship which, at that point, without the 30 tons of the rocket, could well afford up to a third of its gas cells damaged and leaking and even more if they kept the external balloons inflated, which could make a hard though survivable landing even if the wind was strong on the surface.

While the airship jumped up because of the sudden release of its weight, the rocket was falling down and after a couple of seconds, its booster stage engine was lit. The fins at the bow, in the control section produced some drag while falling so the rocket was pointing upwards at an angle. As the rocket accelerated, more and more wind went through the fins and they soon got enough steering power to get it pointing at the correct angle.

The first stage, the booster, was disposable, it was a simple tube of solid fuel, with a star-shaped hole along its center line, wrapped in graphite cloth with a nozzle at one end and the coupling for the second stage at the other. It was not steerable since it burned completely within the atmosphere and the steering fins had enough air to guide the rocket. Once lit, it would burn all the way through, it could not be stopped or controlled. The hole, instead of a plain cylinder, was star-shaped so it exposed more surface area at the beginning. As it burned and widened, it got rounder. The transition from the star shape to a circle could not be precisely controlled but, overall, it provided a quite even rate of burn. The fuel itself was part of the structure and its strong graphite wrapping ensured it didn't blow apart when lit. The gases, with nowhere else to go, came out through the nozzle at the back. Even as the fuel itself was consumed and could no longer provide structural support, the high pressure inside, held by the graphite envelope, kept the stage stiff.

There was no way the fuel could be mixed well enough so that it burned evenly all around. Usually, some area of the fuel would burn faster and might reach the outside container and burn explosively through. To prevent that, there was a layer of a flame extinguishing compound around the fuel core. Whenever the burning got to that layer, it would absorb heat by vaporizing, producing plenty of inert gases which would snuff out the flames from that area, allowing other sections to keep burning until all the fuel got consumed. When the sensors inside the core sensed that the pressure went down, the explosives in the bolts holding the two stages together were fired.

The second stage was hybrid, the fuel was solid but it had no oxidizer mixed in so it could not burn by itself. It had a similar star-shaped hole all along it. At the top end, it had a liquid oxygen tank that could feed the gas into the hole in the fuel only when needed so the stage could be turned on or off. The cold gas would not make the solid fuel burn on its own so a little hydrogen was also fed from another valve and the mix was lit by a spark. The heat of that flame started vaporizing the solid fuel and it then caught fire, which spread all along the length of the stage. The hydrogen was then cut off since the fire could now sustain itself.

There were three small ceramic scoops equally spaced around the rim of the nozzle of the main engine. They could be moved in and out of the jet. These provided steering while the rocket was running by diverting part of the stream sideways. Other, much smaller nozzles at the control section, fed from a liquid nitrogen tank provided finer adjustment, but they were not powerful enough to steer while the main engine was on.

At a preset altitude, the oxygen feed was cut off and the main engine smoldered for a while and then stopped burning altogether. The rocket was now in an eccentric orbit but one that would not get it to Heaven. It had to wait for about a quarter of an orbit to start the engine again and get on its way to Heaven. When the time came, the engine was turned on again and it kept going until the rocket was on the right transfer orbit, when it stopped. The smaller directional nozzles were turned on to make the rocket spin slowly, to prevent the sun from hitting always on the same place and cooking whatever was on that side while letting the other side freeze. The gyroscopic effect would also prevent the rocket from tumbling randomly. A course correction would be done in about 30 hours, close to the midway point.

In the meantime, the airship was trying to come down. When the rocket was released, it literally jumped up several hundred meters and then kept climbing more slowly. Hydrogen was too costly to produce to just let it vent so a set of pumps was turned on to compress the gas from the external balloons into the internal tanks. To speed up the process, the balloons had a set of nooses all around it that would squeeze them and help feed the pumps. Just by squeezing the balloons, their volume was reduced and so the overall density of the airship increased, making it stop its ascent and then fall. The nooses turned the big round balloons into what looked like strings of fat sausages. As the balloons were emptied, they were reeled in until they disappeared completely into the fuselage. Once on the ground, the balloons would be unrolled, checked for leaks and folded nicely into their canisters ready for deployment in the next flight.

Now, the airship was too dense for the height it was in so it started loosing altitude at a great rate. The crew was not alarmed at all by this since, eventually, the airship would reach its normal buoyancy level and the dive would stop on its own. The faster they went, the earlier they would get back home. They were tied on their chairs since the deck was at a very steep angle. The flow of air over the stubby wings and the tail fins allowed them to glide and steer so they were heading back to base. At the beginning, the air was too thin to bother turning on the propellers that had little grip on such flimsy medium and, anyway, they were going faster than the propellers could push them but, as the dive started to slow down in the thicker air, they finally turned the engines on.

While the external balloons could expand freely when the air got thinner, the gas cells in the airship could not change their volume without altering the overall shape of the airship which would affect its aerodynamic performance thus, some of the gas cells had internal balloons so air could be let in and out of those balloons without mixing with the hydrogen. By pumping the hydrogen into the cryogenic tanks, the air would simply fill those internal balloons and the density of the airship got increased allowing it to float further down. Once hovering over the landing site, they used the directional engines on the sides to push down and maneuver to attach the bow to the mooring mast. The ground crew caught the mooring lines which had been rolled out on approach and started attaching them to the windlasses and when enough of them were ready, the engines were turned off. The airship hung from the mooring mast like a weather vane and the wind was slightly off the center line of the shed. The windlasses pulled the airship around to get it aligned with the shed and then closer to the ground and, finally, the telescoping shed was extended to enclose it. 
