# 19 - Fania's Trip

"Cool!", said a youngster.

"Would you know my beloved Jan? He passed away a month ago. Has he sent a message for me?", asked an old lady.

"Blasphemous!", cried an angry man.

"Is it really made of candy sugar?" asked a child.

The reactions to Jobas arrival amongst the general public were varied but, in the end it became just one more news item following the usual cycle before being relegated to the cheaper popular magazines. The reforms ordered by the Supreme Priest weighted much more on everybody, even if few would notice in the short term. Both the Supreme Priest and Enuas had to cope with the groups most affected by them.

Enuas had to negotiate with the Council of Mothers where the limit would be for his part of the reforms. The Mothers held power at the local level and it would be hard to intrude into it. The Supreme Priest had to deal with his peers who saw much of their power curtailed as their influence on the mundane would be taken away from them. A hundred thousand more people living in another planet was of no concern to either of these groups. A third group who was worried about them were the most conservative and ritualistic parts of society who saw two of their main symbols shattered in the face of the public, Heaven, the residence of the Gods and Pinnacle, their main site of worship. Fortunately, this was a small group and not particularly influential. Thus, it is fair to say that Jobas' descent from Heaven didn't add much trouble to the pile the Supreme Priest already had to deal with, one of his own creation.

If anything, the people from Heaven could help in the process by sweetening the deal on other areas. It didn't take long for their activities in drug development to be published and the millions of lives they had saved known as well as the many they could improve now that they didn't need to hide. Though unrelated to the political changes started by the Supreme Priest, the people felt that changes, of any sort, wherever they came from, would bring a better future and simply wanted more of them.

Not all was so rosy, more people could have been saved with better medicines but weren't. Their relatives weren't happy about it. They were a very small minority but, for a while, they were a very loud voice everyone sympathized with. Others had been affected economically. Manufacturers of paints and ceramics who were thrown out of the market by Heaven's incursion into these two industries, demanded compensation.

Fania's travel to Heaven caught all the attention away from these issues for some time. It was expected that, eventually, higher representatives of both planets would visit each other but until a suitable means of transportation could be put in place, something that was years in the future, that was out of the question. There could hardly be anyone more willing or psychologically prepared to travel through space than Fania. She had a big fan base whose interests and expectations had so far been marginal and now were becoming popular. Suddenly, lots of what had been techno-fantasy was turning out to be less fantastic.

As was usual with insomniacs, Fania would travel alone. The rocket was prepared in the Island and attached to the airship but without its passenger. The airship then traveled to Pinnacle where Fania would board it. Due to the length of the trip from the Island to Pinnacle and return, the daily shipment of cargo would not happen except for the few items that could travel along with Fania.

The top of Pinnacle was visible from all over Pinnacle City and its promenade. Fania was sent off on the balcony of the Great Temple over the large esplanade by the Supreme Priest, receiving goodwill letters and gifts to deliver to Heaven. She had arrived at Pinnacle in the platform of a truck dressed up for the occasion after a trip along the Promenade so the public could see her and wish her Godspeed. Fania's trip was very significant to several groups, those who believed women could be destined to reach higher goals than motherhood, insomniacs who still felt discriminated against in small, remote villages and young people in general. On the other hand, there had been a few groups in that crowd that decried the trip as either fake, blasphemous or immoral, but they were nothing but isolated incidents. Rumblings in the esplanade were silent but more troubling since they came from people in power that would soon see it curtailed and were naturally opposed to anything that promoted change.

After the farewells in the balcony of the Great Temple, relayed through loudspeakers placed for a long stretch of the promenade, Fania boarded a smaller vehicle that took her to the Observatory. With the airship full of hydrogen, it was safer to keep any possible source of sparks at a safe distance. Fania walked the last stretch to the top where the airship was moored to a temporary mast built for the occasion. As was usual with insomniacs she would travel in the airship and board the capsule shortly before departure since reaching launch altitude would take a few hours.

Once everyone was on board, the airship detached from the mooring tower and backed away from it. It then descended and flew over the sea along the promenade at a safe distance -an idiot lighting fireworks could not be discounted- with Fania reporting all that happened with the occasional help of the crew. This was broadcast through the loudspeakers in the Promenade and brief excerpts continually transmitted over the telegraph wires. A half a dozen receivers were set in other cities to listen to the broadcast live. Fania, as almost everyone on Mother, had never traveled by air so, for the crowds in the Promenade, the view of the airship was already a big event.

Pinnacle was already at the equator so the rocket could be launched right there but the airship went westward so that when it was launched eastward as was always the case, the rocket would be visible for longer. After a single pass along the Promenade, the airship started to climb and in half an hour it was out of view. The crowds started leaving the Promenade. Some would return later for the launch, others would climb to rooftops or watch it from any of the parks in the city. A good number simply stayed and had a field day while listening to Fania's reports.

The launch was set for a few minutes after the midday eclipse so that the public would be able to see the flame of the rocket. People on Mother usually took a long nap during the midday eclipse since they weren't used to staying out while dark. Many got mildly drowsy as if getting ready for hibernation. Streets were poorly lighted and few people owned a lantern but, uncomfortable as they might feel, the Promenade was once again crowded by the time of the launch.

A ladder reached from the airship cockpit to the entrance to the capsule in the rocket hanging below. It was enclosed in a flexible cloth tunnel to provide a warm and pressurized means to reach the capsule. Fania went down the ladder and entered the capsule, followed by a technician to assist her and do a final checkup. She was crouching, almost sitting, facing forward as the rocket was hanging horizontally from the airship. When the rocket ignited, she would feel like laying down on her back with a great weight on her. After the final checkup, the technician wished her Godspeed, closed the hatch and climbed the ladder back to the cockpit. Once there, he closed the hatch on the airship side and, once secure, drained the air off the tunnel, detached it from the capsule and folded it, along the ladder, free of the rocket.

The airship had an improvised beacon flashing to allow the public to locate it in the darkness of the eclipse. As the launch time approached, everyone on Mother was looking up in silence. Launch was the last item on the checklist. A brief moment was allowed for Fania to say something if she wished to but, whatever she had planned, if anything, she forgot and simply said, "Ready, wish me luck". The captain did so and pressed the launch button. The lines holding the rocket snapped and the rocket started to fall while the airship, free from its weight, shot straight up.

Fania barely had time to describe the falling sensation when the engine lit up and was left speechless, pressed against the couch. The people on the ground saw the flame, a dot shinier and steadier than the airship beacon, that left a short sparkling trace behind. A few were concerned since it pretty much looked as an explosion, Fania was silent and only the noise of the rocket engine could be heard over the loudspeakers but as soon as she was able to catch her breath, she started talking again, very short phrases since the pressure of the acceleration overwhelmed her. It crossed the dark, night face of Heaven and in no time came out on the other side. Heaven was a dark circle surrounded by a shiny halo as its atmosphere was lighted by the sun behind it. As the trajectory of the rocket started to angle up, the flame seemed to stay fixed in the eastern sky until it faded. Most people left to finally get their nap but a few remained bunched around the loudspeakers, listening to Fania.

The flight controllers at Heaven had paid particular attention to this flight. Usually, the passengers were hibernating sleepers and could not see anything. Sightseeing had never been a priority even for insomniac passengers but for Fania and her broadcast, they had been careful to roll the rocket so that she could see through one of the portholes on the side the coast and the land beyond while flying over the sea. There wasn't much to see in the area shaded by the eclipse since even the largest cities were so poorly lit, but the eclipse soon passed and Fania could report what she saw. Less than half an hour after launch she reached the far, unpopulated side of Mother where it was night. Her focus then became describing the dark sky and the stars, a view few in Mother had ever seen as Heaven was beyond the horizon and its light couldn't dim that of the stars. In a few minutes, all communication was lost as she was beyond the reach of the receivers on the ground, or of the relay satellite or of Heaven.

Usually, the rocket would re-ignite while on the far side of Mother to start on its way to Heaven but the controllers had added an extra orbit around Mother for another transmission from Fania. With the midday eclipse over, all of the populated side of Mother was fully lit. After an initial private conversation in between Fania and flight control to see how she was faring, the broadcast was on again and Fania started describing what she saw. Since the engine was off, she was floating free within the capsule and could move at will. Her broadcast alternated in between descriptions of what she saw through any of the portholes and her own sensations, not all agreeable, while floating. Flight control helped her trace her path over Mother's equator on a map so she could name the places she was describing. Whenever she mentioned some town, a few immigrants from that place within the crowd in Pinnacle City's Promenade would cheer. When she approached Pinnacle City, everyone was standing and waving their hands to her even though she couldn't see them. The ground control team on the top of Pinnacle, still dismantling the equipment there, told Fania over their radio link what was happening on the Promenade so she was able to thank the crowd which produced even more cheers.

After forty more minutes, her transmission was lost again as she flew over the far side and this time the rockets did ignite to push her on her way to Heaven. She got back on line once on the near side. The engine was still on but being the second stage one, the pressure wasn't so hard as with the first stage booster and she could talk far easier. It all ceased when the proper escape velocity was reached and the engine was cut off. By then, Fania was exhausted and hungry, though her stomach felt somehow funny so, she said goodbye and cut off the transmission. She would transmit again three or four times along the trip even answering questions from the public.

In her free time, she wrote and edited the next issue of her magazine, the first to be edited in space. Baria, back in the office on Banglion had been working hard for that issue which was expected to have a five-fold circulation over earlier issues and quite possible a reprint. Every writer wanted to have an article with his or her name in it. While preparing for Fania's trip, several big offers from a large publishing houses came to buy the whole business and hire them all. This would take care of any remaining needs for printing, distribution and advertising.

It was felt that selling would bring long term benefits for Heaven in the business world. After the ill will that came after the somewhat unfair competition and eventual takeover of the painting, ceramics and other raw chemicals industries became known, selling some assets to local business people would allow Heaven to regain their goodwill. Being nice to any of the largest publishers on Mother was doubly beneficial since it could transpire into the newspapers they also owned and through them reach the public. One of the offers came from the owner of several of the most offensive tabloids so that one was out of the question.  The other two had been reasonably balanced on their coverage of Heaven.  Not surprisingly, there had been no offers from the conservative media, which still had a hard time swallowing the existence of the real Heaven, not the one in their holy texts. So, in the end, money decided the issue. Thus, what was already the biggest publicity stunt Mother had known became even larger with such an important publishing house behind it.

----

Heaven didn't mind selling any of their current assets in Mother. They could start plenty of new businesses. There were lots of commercially valuable ideas in their archives which they could now exploit freely since they didn't need to hide themselves any more. Heaven still needed a lot of money to finance their operations and the construction of the space cable system and, for the government of Mother, if those resources came from the private sale of licenses to local businessmen in Mother it was much better than support it from the public treasury.

In the case of the claims for compensation by the owner of a paints and pigments business that had been put out of business, the judges ruled that Heaven had become the rightful owner of those ideas by virtue of the effort taken in preserving them for all those centuries. That established precedent towards future such claims, which might have costed Heaven zillions.

However, it also considered Heaven's patents expired since, though unknown in Mother at the time of granting, they had already been published in Heaven and possibly in Mother itself before the Great War so they had all expired centuries ago. This did not cause any undue concern in Heaven.  They had such a great archive that no amount of people in Mother could possibly catch up and exploit so many ideas.

Nevertheless, an idea on its own is a far way off its actual implementation.  Knowhow and experience are also needed so, while retiring from the actual production and manufacturing, Heaven's assets in Mother moved to the consulting business.  For example, Anisia's factory at Banglion was sold, which freed Anisia who was more valuable to Heaven in other matters.  Likewise, Jon, who was already free from the publishing side of business after the sale, also became available.  Overall, this was a better way to use the scarce human assets Heaven had on Mother.

Then, there was an industrial base still to develop.  Heaven could manufacture things that were unthinkable to build in Mother. There were plenty of business opportunities for Heaven in Mother and, as Mother businessmen soon found out, there were plenty of good business opportunities for them thanks to Heaven.  So, far from seeing Heaven as competition, they were very happy to do business with them.
