# 20 - Changes in Pinnacle

Pinnacle was slowly changing. The structure to anchor the cable had to be finished. That could not be done via the tunnel Allucio and Ferbin had cleared up at the Observatory nor through the main entrance at the bottom since the current Great Temple was too close to it. One of the side tunnels had to be used as the main access. Anyway, the structure was not going to be built as originally projected but much smaller. Heaven alone did not have the resources to build the cable system as originally planned. It was also unfair to expect Mother to foot the whole bill. So, they would build it on a smaller scale.

The cable system would only carry cargo and mostly one way. Speed is costly. As originally designed, a passenger carriage would take two full days to go either way. Passengers require air, food, water and entertainment for such a trip, even if they hibernated for a good part of it. Cargo, on the other hand, can take any amount of time to travel, doesn't need life support systems and, if anything goes wrong, is expendable. This greatly reduces the cost. In the small-scale system, each package of cargo would take six days to travel, almost half a year, but with a package being sent every few hours, a continuous stream would arrive at Heaven.

Trying to make a single cable carry cargo in two directions means that carriages must be able to cross each other safely at high-speed on the same cable or that the direction of flow must be periodically reversed. Since the fastest trip takes two days and you cannot switch directions while the cable still has a carriage in it, you would be able to do just eight trips a year. Making it one way meant they could send a continuous stream of cargo. This perfectly suited Heaven's needs because it needed far more tonnage shipped from Mother to Heaven than the other way around. For traffic going from Heaven to Mother, regular rockets would have to do. Rockets were more expensive but less so than stopping the flow of cargo towards Heaven to allow for a change in direction.

There was another big issue, Mother and Heaven didn't move in a perfectly circular orbit around one another. As with most celestial objects in closed orbits, they moved in an elliptical orbit. It was quite a circular orbit for the standards of such celestial matters, but still it meant that the distance in between the two planets varied by a couple of hundreds of kilometers. That much cable had to be reeled in and out twice per year. Other perturbations, the wobbles Allucio perceived through his telescope, needed some more flexibility. They varied from perturbations in the orbits for either planet, the influence of other celestial bodies or earthquakes close to either anchorage. The Coriolis force would make the cable draw an arch, not a straight line, in between the planets, thus, by letting it curve or flatten more or less the cable would take care of this on its own. Early on it was decided to locate as much of the equipment as possible on Heaven because they could start to build it whenever they wished and they could be ready when they finally broke the news of their own existence to the people on Mother. Thus, by the time it was decided, there was very little that had to be done on the Mother side and it was all at a much smaller scale than it was originally designed.

The cable had already been woven in Heaven over a couple of years and had been in storage for about the same time. It was put in orbit once the use of Pinnacle was secured. Since it would have been too big for a single launch, it was made in twelve segments, six symmetrical pairs. These were put in orbit one at a time and bonded end to end to make the full cable. The cable was actually a ribbon short of a millimeter thick in the middle and thinning towards its ends. It was a third of a meter wide all over. The 12 ribbons were not rolled into a spool but laid in an eight-shape as if wound around a ship horn cleat. This allowed the ribbon to be pulled out without twisting as the loop on one side of the eight undid the twist on the other half. It also avoided the problem of dealing with the momentum of a spinning spool when deploying the cable. Finally, and probably more important, it allowed the twelve segments to have their ends bonded together before leaving orbit, otherwise, with a spooled ribbon, you cannot reach the inside end until the whole ribbon is out.

Once in space, the aerodynamic fairings had been discarded and each of the ribbon segments looked like a big 8. The attitude control systems, shipped in separate rockets since the ribbons themselves took all the available capacity of their rockets, were attached in orbit to each of the eights so that each now looked like an 8 with a bar crossing it horizontally at the middle. The attitude control systems contained the control electronics, the reaction wheels that would make sure the whole thing didn't go tumbling out of control, the brakes to control the rate of deployment and the rockets to control its descent and, finally, its fuel tanks. The twelve segments were then linked together as a train with spars. An extra attitude control system was right in the middle of the set of segments and two fairings, to protect the ends of the cable that would eventually enter the atmosphere of each planet, fitted one at each end. A rocket was finally attached to one end, to push the whole thing up to the midway point in between the two planets.

At the midway point, the gravity of the two planets is balanced so whatever is left there would remain there, were it not for the wobbles and other celestial perturbations that would eventually make it fall to either planet. When anchored, however, the cable would remain in place. The rocket was lit and the train of ribbon segments started on its way. Once the desired speed was reached, the tug rocket was separated from the ribbons and with a final burn, brought down to burn up in the atmosphere. The train of ribbons traveled alone for most of the trip rising away from Heaven against its gravity and slowing down until, when reaching the midway point, it barely had any extra speed left.

Upon reaching the midway point, the spars linking the central attitude control system to each of the adjoining segments were detached. Now, the train was separated into three parts, the central attitude control system in the middle and a set of six ribbon segments on either side. The attitude control jets on the trailing group of six segments fired to slow it down. The train was spreading apart with the ribbon being paid out in between. The jets on the central attitude control system also fired slowing it down. Now, there were three groups, the central attitude control system and two groups of six segments each, slowly separating from each other with the ribbon being deployed in between them. The forward group of six was allowed to continue and overshoot the midway point on its way towards Mother. The trailing group was slowing down so it would start to fall down back towards Heaven. The central attitude control system was slowing down but no so much, just enough to reach the midway point and stay there.

The system depended on the center of gravity of the whole to reach the midway point and then remain stable there. The jets on the central attitude system had enough power to handle just a little bit of this delicate balance, its most important function was to measure whether it was on its way to reach midway point and, if not, whether it was over or under-shooting it. If there was any deviation, the attitude control system on one of the falling segments would brake harder on the ribbon pulling the whole system towards it and re-balancing it. The attitude control jets also fired every now and then to ensure both ends were running at the same pace.

As each of the segments emptied, the corresponding attitude control system would detach and fly away and the ribbon would start to come out of the next segment. The whole deployment would last two full days and nights. It could be done faster but then, the last segment would enter the atmosphere at a tremendous speed and would burn. To slow it down, the brakes were active the whole time, though modulated to keep the system in balance. Since the ribbon was conductive, induction brakes were used which did not need to touch the ribbon. They did, however, create heat which could damage the material of the ribbon. Thus, the deployment had to be slow enough to allow that heat to dissipate but not so slow that would make the induction brakes ineffective.

The final segment carried the fairing to protect the cable the last few tens of kilometers once in the atmosphere. The fairing also had some steering capability by means of flaps that would come out on the sides to cause drag. A beacon on each of the anchorage structures was the target of the fairings, however, it was unlikely that it would fall exactly in the bullseye. An airship was waiting at each end to grab the tip of the cable as soon as it fell since the most gentle breeze would blow it away in no time.

Though the whole cable weighted several tones, the part of it within the atmosphere didn't reach a kilogram; the fairing itself weighted more than that. The fairing carried another beacon for the airship to home in. The airship had horns attached to its bow, like a two-pronged pitchfork spanning ten meters on either side to catch the ribbon in between them. Two more horns were fixed on its sides further back for a second chance. The horns had hooks at their tips to prevent the ribbon from slipping away and were hinged at its base so as to close on the ribbon once trapped. They had practiced the operation several times by shooting the same kilometer long segment of ribbon from the ground with small rockets for the airship to catch it on its simulated descent. The airship on-board computer was able to calculate the intercept course thanks to the beacon on the fairing. That would get them within visual range, then it depended on the pilot.

Since the operation was simultaneous on both worlds, it would be day on one of them but night on the other. The night side would require an insomniac crew and, since they didn't have enough insomniacs residing in Mother, Heaven would do the night capture.

The cable was expected to land either on Pinnacle or in the sea. As a safety measure, the fairing had a small parachute just in case it veered off towards the city. The cable itself didn't need one since it was so light that it simply fluttered behind. If the tip were to fall as planned the parachute would not deploy since it would only allow the wind to push it further away making it harder to catch the cable.

As the fairing entered the atmosphere, the beacon started to transmit. It was falling at a far slower speed than capsules usually did thanks to the continuous braking, thus, there was no ionization of the air to shield the radio signals. The airship computer displayed a cone with the tip at the fairing enclosing the possible trajectories. The airship was within it, upwind from Pinnacle. As the fairing fell, the cone would become smaller and soon the airship would be left out of the cone. The goal was to keep the airship right off the upwind edge of the cone. The pilot started the main propeller as the airship was left out of the cone and started following it. Then, it was just a matter of seconds until the fairing passed slightly left in front of their windscreen, with the ribbon trailing behind. The pilot put all the engines at full power, to catch the cable as soon as possible, before it was blown away by the wind. In a matter of seconds, the cable got trapped in the left horn and the copilot closed the horns to trap it. The airship then slowed down and turned towards Pinnacle.

The top of Pinnacle was no longer a solid platform, it now had a hole surrounded by a balcony. The cable was to pass through that opening to the anchorage inside. As the airship hovered over the top of Pinnacle, a group of people in the balcony around it caught the ribbon with the help of poles with hooks and secured it. The tip of the ribbon was in the water where the fairing had fallen. To reach it, they threaded the ribbon through a set of powered rollers that would reel the ribbon in. When they reached the tip, they let it fall into the structure.

The last few tens of meters of the ribbon thickened back again and then separated in layers, temporarily tied together for transport. This was to spread the tension of the whole cable along a larger surface. The platform that Allucio and Ferbin first saw when entering the structure was no longer hanging in the void, the platform covered the whole area at that level, you could no longer see the volume below. In the center of it there was a slit. It was formed by the edges of two steel blocks that hung below the platform. Its purpose was to clamp the ribbon and prevent the split in between the layers to propagate upwards and tear the ribbon apart. The bottom part of those blocks curved gently outwards to allow the layers to fan out.

The tip of the ribbon, still with all its layers tied together, was threaded through that slit. When enough of it had gone through, two technicians started tightening the bolts to bring the two halves of the block together. The block could not hold the cable down when operating, it was only to stop it from flaking off, but it was enough to hold it against the wind so the guys on the outer rim could now release the ribbon from the rollers which were still holding it.

The tip of the cable was now hanging down into the cavernous interior of the anchorage structure. It was no longer the empty hollow space Allucio and Ferbin first saw. The anchorage was finally built and screwed down to the structure via the bolts that were embedded into the concrete foundation. The anchorage was made of several beams of steel, all pointing to the slit where the ribbon was coming out. Each of the beams had a polished face, where the ribbon was to be glued. A separate movable plate of steel would be also glued to the other side of the ribbon and bolted to the fixed side. The ribbon would then be sandwiched in between these two.

The technicians had the central beam with the glue carefully spread on it. They loosened the bundle of layers and started leafing through them until they reached the central one. They did all this with great care using gloves, as the edges of any of this layers could cut a person in two. They then laid the layer of ribbon over the steel beam. The glue would remain fluid until cured so they had time to align it properly. They used a steel roller to squeeze out any air bubbles. Then, with the help of the bridge crane high above, they brought the other steel section. It had already been covered with glue. The bottom edge was first lowered into the slot that would serve as a hinge and then lowered over the ribbon. Once in place, bolts were fastened along the long edges. The heater was then placed around it. The heat along the pressure of the two plates pressing against each other would cure the glue.

One by one, they would do the same on each of the layers of the ribbon. It took several hours to do each one so they would rest and have a meal or go home to take a nap. This was the easier of the two ends, as it was fixed. The other end, on Heaven, had to be able to reel the cable in and out about two hundred kilometers twice every year. The mechanism there was too complex to describe. Once ready and tested, two days after the tip had fallen, the ribbon began to be reeled in and then slowly tensioned for a stress test.

----

Another large structure was being finished, a solar power station that was to power the cargo pods. The pods would have photovoltaic cells to power their electric motors but to get enough energy out of the sun, they would need to be too large and heavy. Instead they would be fed from the concentrated beam of lasers, allowing for much smaller panels. The lasers would be produced by a power station placed in the stable point 66.666... grads ahead of the midway point. It had also been assembled in Heaven's orbit out of a few shipments and then pushed to its final destination.

The power station was made of a central core with a series of focusable power lasers, one for each cargo pod. They received their power from a series of photovoltaic cells around it. The cells were made of graphene ribbons with a photovoltaic layer all radiating out of the central unit as the petals of a huge flower. They were not rigid and were kept open flat by centrifugal force by slowly turning the whole system. They had also been deployed by centrifugal force. Initially, all the ribbons were spun one over the other all around the central unit. Then, once it was in the proper orientation pointing towards the sun, it was spun quite fast. The clamps keeping the ribbons tight against the central core were then let go. As they started to stretch out, they ate into the momentum of the central unit and the whole thing slowed down. Initially the ribbons were curved in gentle spirals around the center but as they spread, they straightened out. The outer tips of each ribbon were tied to the tips of its neighbors which forced the ribbons to turn and lay all flat facing the sun. Small ionic engines were attached to the tips of some of the ribbons to change the orientation of the whole system so as to keep it always pointing to the sun. A similar station would be placed in the trailing stable point, symmetrical to the existing one, to serve as a backup and, with the two of them operating, to eventually double the carrying capacity of the system.

Another power station was built on Mother in a field in the outskirts of Pinnacle City. It would power the cargo pods during the first stages of the ascent. It was felt it would not be a good idea to get a laser coming from outer space shining on the ground. Though it got diffused along its travel through such a big distance and then passing through the atmosphere so that it wouldn't shine much brighter than the sun and it wouldn't blind anybody, there was a good chance people would object. Thus, a ground based laser would power the pods through the first stretch. Until the capacitor bank got built to store power during the day to spend during the night, the ground based laser would not work at night. For the first trials, this was fine.

----

The first pod carried a standard cargo plus letters from the Supreme Priest and Enuas. The platform at the level of the Observatory had become the preparation room. The climbing mechanism was first attached to the ribbon and tested up and down several times with power provided via an electrical power cord. The cargo itself was packed elsewhere and attached to the climbing mechanism in the preparation room. The climber was then send, powered still through the power cord until it reached above the tip of Pinnacle where the light from the laser could shine on it. The pod and the laser were connected via a radio link. Initially, the laser, set at a very low power, scanned the general area where the pod should be. The pod then send a signal back to the laser to tell it when it had been hit by the laser. From then on, the pod would continually send the laser information telling it when it was pointing off-center. Once focused and at full power, the climber started to go up, faster and faster.

The Promenade was by no means as full as when Fania took off but, still, plenty of people had concentrated there, slightly less even than those who saw the cable arrive and get caught by the airship. At that distance, they could only see the pod as a shining dot as it was hit by the laser. The cable itself was hardly visible since it was edge on to the laser to prevent it from getting burned, only a short segment on either side of the cargo pod shone under some diffused light from the laser. The shining dot dropped out of sight quite soon. The laser beam could be seen now and then as it traversed some cloud. If the clouds got really dense, the space-based laser would take over.

The pull of that first cargo pod would be felt on Heaven fifteen hours later as it propagated along the cable at the speed of sound. The pod itself would take thirty times as much.

The toughest part of the trip was the initial one through the atmosphere. The pods used contact-less linear induction motors which were not efficient at low speed and high drag. In the initial acceleration the electrical current generated by the induction motor on the ribbon would overheat it to the point of burning it. Later on, when cruising, the currents were weaker and at high speed, the pod would not remain enough time at any place to raise its temperature that much.  So, for the initial stage of  its climb the pod would have a *pusher*, a tractor with caterpillar tracks rolling over the ribbon that helped it get up to speed and out of the thick of the atmosphere. Additional batteries on the pusher provided extra power and kept it going when clouds blocked the laser. The pods had extra solar panels on hinges, often called *wings*, that could be extended if the wind conditions allowed. The batteries helped when they could not be deployed.  After almost an hour, the pusher would let the pod speed ahead on its own induction motor and start to fall back to Mother. It would go down braking all the time, its speed limited to how much heat from the braking it could radiate away or dissipate in the air. Anyway, there was no rush as the next shipment would still be hours away.

Power was not required beyond the midway point, from there on, the pod would be falling. The laser no longer shone on it. If left alone, the pod would accelerate to tens of thousands of kilometers per hour, burning up in the atmosphere and melting the cable on its path. The pod had to go braking all the way down, but braking produces heat and in the vacuum of space there is no easy way to dissipate heat, you just have to allow for enough time to let it radiate away. The solar panel *wings* helped radiate heat away so they were turned edge on towards the sun to avoid that major source of heat. For the last few kilometers, once in the atmosphere, light, almost transparently thin parachutes would help for the final stretch.  The ribbon itself would heat up in the braking but, being so slender, it could be twisted by the pod using its reaction wheels. It was fixed to be edge on towards the ground laser when coming out of Pinnacle and it was kept always edge on to whatever laser was pointing at it. For the descent, there were no lasers involved, so the ribbon was twisted by the pod itself to be edge-on to the sun so both surfaces could radiate heat away.

When cargo had to go faster than the cable allowed, rockets had to be used. Humans and other extremely time-sensitive cargo would travel by rocket as they did before the cable was in place. Other express cargo would be carried in rocket powered pods. These would ascend via the cable as any other cargo but would detach from it once in space. The small rocket would then push the cargo the rest of the way. A heat shield would slow down and protect the cargo when reaching Heaven's atmosphere. The available payload on an express pod was half that of a regular pod. The small rocket, heat shield, parachute and navigation equipment took a good chunk of the space in the pod but it cut the travel time to less than a day at a lower cost than a full rocket launch.

On arrival, the cargo container was discarded while the climber was shipped back to Mother, twenty of them to a rocket, to eventually repeat the trip.
