# 21 - Banglion

The little boy was standing on the footbridge, his face showing in between his hands that were holding to the bars of the railing. He was looking down into the basin where a barge was approaching and would soon pass under him. Every once in a while Anisia would take little Anrich to the playground on the park by the basin instead of the one closest to their home. Anrich could spend hours on that bridge, running from above the railroad station to over the basin and back again as he saw either trains or barges coming and going.

"Look, Anrich, the captain is waving hello to us. Wave him hello, Anrich. Hello, captain!", said Anisia while waving her hand. Allucio would have pointed out that barges don't have captains, but at Anrich's age, if it moved on the water, it was a ship, and ships had captains at their wheels.

A big truck passed by the main bridge, a block away, catching Anrich's attention. Banglion had grown over the years, the noise of traffic could now be heard. In the early days, she would cross the whole span of the footbridge without seeing a single vehicle on the main road. Now, it could get congested. There were also enough barges and trains passing through to keep Anrich entertained for a long time.

When the Supreme Priest started what was now referred to as the Civic Reform, Pinnacle got crowded. Besides the uninvited distinguished guests wondering about or peddling for their positions, there were those convened to the two major bodies that were to write the basic principles of justice and government for Mother. It soon became evident that there was not enough space for all. Classes at Pinnacle had been suspended, pretty much as had been the case during the Conclave, and students either went home or were assigned to help in the committees which, for many of them, would be the best work experience they could have.

Anisia herself had been part of that turmoil. While the existence of people in Heaven became famously advertised through Jobas' stunt, their organization in Mother was, even if no longer clandestine, still largely unknown. Anisia remained the main point of contact in those days. She often found herself walking past the staring eyes of the dignitaries competing for attention.

Enuas felt as if nothing would ever get done if he remained in Pinnacle. Back then, Banglion had a good quantity of new housing not yet assigned plus a brand new conference center, hotels and other facilities almost unused. Enuas convened the committee to define the new Civil Government there. He moved there himself along with part of the existing administration thus making more explicit the split in between the Civil Government and the religious authorities, still residing in Pinnacle. It soon became evident that this temporary arrangement would better become permanent; the Civil Government could not gain its due stature under the shadow of Pinnacle. Eventually, it was thought, plans would be drawn to either found a new city, alter the plans for one of the projected cities to be repopulated or modify those of Banglion itself, which was still less than a third built and, thus, had plenty of room to expand into its new functions. In the end, no explicit decision was taken but little by little, Banglion became the permanent seat of the Civil Government.

It became clear that the scientific and technological developments that Heaven could provide would affect Mother's society. The alternative, which a few favored, was to remain stuck in the past. The fear was not totally unfounded, the Great War had been the culmination of the technological prowess of their forbears. Enuas needed someone who could understand and help him evaluate how to integrate them into their society and from his former subordinates in the Sciences Department, Allucio was the smartest and most open-minded, partly because he was the only one younger than Enuas himself. Allucio thus became one of Enuas' aides and ended up in Banglion as well.

Heaven didn't mean to have an unduly high influence in defining the shape of government on Mother, it would have been unfair. Due to their very different cultures, a large degree of autonomy was the best for both, however, Heaven did have records from well before the Great War, which were invaluable. Mother had had just one culture and one form of government barely changed since the days of Elvar. The archives at Heaven and its historians could provide a wealth of information from the days when there had been many countries with a variety of forms of government from which many ideas could be taken. Enuas asked for a permanent liaison to Heaven's historians and archivists. Sleepers on either planet were unable to communicate face to face as their day/night cycles were polar opposites. The replies to their questions took too long, answers would only arrive the day after they were asked. As it was soon found out, Anisia proved invaluable. By attending in person to the meetings in Mother, she was able to provide more information when the researchers at Heaven were in doubt of what was being asked, or narrow down their searches and make better use of their time. Those had been very exciting days for her, as she participated in discussions that would define the governance of a whole planet, something she had never dreamed she would do.

Anisia and Allucio had become friends the first night after Jobas' arrival when Anisia went to Pinnacle to help him adjust to the day/night cycle of Mother. Now they worked close together on the transfer of knowledge from Heaven to Mother, Allucio on science and technology, Anisia on governance and economics. The volume of work kept increasing so each led a small team mostly of insomniacs to help.

As many of her colleagues and friends insisted on pointing out, spending all those long nights working close to Allucio was an added benefit, wasn't it? Fioni was the main promoter of that cajoling. As Enuas started to learn the extent of Heaven's operations in Mother, the many issues of irregular property registration, fake birth certificates and other irregular personal and commercial documentation he established an office to sort all that out. Though Fioni's brother had taken care of the legal and not so legal technicalities, it was Fioni who actually knew the who is who and what belongs to whom on Mother. That, coupled with her natural charm as a hostess, made her the informal diplomatic representative of Heaven on Mother. She rented a house in Banglion and spent a good chunk of her time there, the equally informal embassy of Heaven.

Jobas was a frequent guest at that house as well, as a consultant in social and mass psychology, though he preferred to live in the Farm. Unfortunately for him, on returning to Heaven, he found it difficult to adapt to life under the domes and to return to his married life. After two years of carrying the picture of his family close to him, always expecting to be together again, things simply didn't work out well for them once face to face. When the fall-from-the-sky stunt was finally decided he volunteered for it and, with his experience, became the best choice. Jobas had been the main conceptual designer of the simulation system Heaven used to predict the responses of the people on Mother to their actions. His earlier visit had been mostly to gather more information on the field, to test some hypothesis of his and in general to get a better feeling for the society he was trying to model. Now, that same system was running simulations on the drafts resolutions of the committee and Jobas often had to testify in one subcommittee or other.

His reports surfaced some quite disquieting surprises. Theocracies, with their eyes on the heavenly, invariably tend to ignore many practical, worldly matters. Jobas didn't wear any blinkers, he modeled what he saw, which might not always be what a lowly priest would like to report to his superior. Human weaknesses were more numerous and significant than what the Priesthood wanted to acknowledge. Fortunately, there were the Councils of Mothers at the local level and what the priests would hesitate to cope with, the mothers would handle, but that was hardly a recipe for good and fair government. Until Jobas's statistics, admittedly only estimates extrapolated from samples, no data existed on subjects such as how many households were headed by a man. As it turned out, there were more than expected. With the mother, the head of the household missing the situation of such a family was precarious. Legally, with all children underage or male, they could be evicted, the children dispersed amongst relatives or orphanages, the money resulting from the forced sale of the house kept in custody until they became adults. The best the local council could do was to look the other way. There were many more touchy issues, some considered immoral, sinful or against custom. All in all, about a third of the population was somehow touched by one such blight, in very many cases by no fault of their own. The Priesthood had failed them, the new civil government shouldn't.

Their system had worked well for so long because the distribution of power was well balanced.  No autocracy ever lasts much, but government based on a well balanced mechanism of distributing power and with mutual checks usually does.  In Mother, the Councils of Mothers provided the local level of government with a high degree of autonomy. When disputes arose that they could not solve themselves, they had the Priesthood to resort to.  The Priesthood provided for global administration and sustained the unifying philosophy that kept the society together, but, if they overstepped their boundaries, the mothers could either fight back or, quite often, simply ignore them.  However, membership to each branch of government was fixed by sex or, if a woman, by her ability to bear children, and that same division of roles was present in many aspects of their society.  Early on that division of roles had been useful, after all, it had been formalized from what was already happening.  Those days were long gone and the mechanism of government was due for a change.

----

Insomniacs didn't have many places to go during the night. Only a few large cities had public places open at night. Insomniacs were used to have no grocery stores, bars, restaurants or other such places. Due to the generations of discrimination, many still kept quiet about their condition. Most insomniac store owners could be found along canals since bargemen were the first if not well-regarded at least tolerated insomniac community thanks to their strong guild. Perhaps it would be fairer to say that the canals were a sort of ghetto, physically open but culturally separate. Banglion didn't have any such places, the basin by the railroad station had not yet attracted any night-time business. Allucio and Anisia had nowhere to go after work hours in the whole silent city. For a while they kept away from each other after work hours, but the circumstances kept pushing them together, and they liked that more and more. It didn't take long for them to accept what for everyone else seemed inevitable. Allucio was very sweet proposing, he even tried to do it Heaven style, which was quite a relief for her since Mother's ways were too elaborate for her taste and somewhat demeaning for the man who more or less asked for shelter and protection in 'her' household. They ended up being the first inter-planetary couple whose partnership was registered in the newly instituted Civil Registry and, though no priest presided, they even got a letter from the Supreme Priest blessing their union, which Enuas read.

Now, they had little Anrich. Anisia named him after Anric, her manager at the Farm. She felt she owned him her new life on Mother. Allucio had agreed if for no other reason that in Mother, fathers were never involved in naming their children. He only suggested the change in spelling because that is how it sounded to him when Anisia pronounced it in her native accent. Anisia remembered how, not so long ago, she felt uncomfortable when people mentioned her becoming a mother as if it was a duty, a foregone outcome. She went from being an outcast from her own home planet on probation in a foreign land to a very influential undersecretary in the cabinet of the Head of Government. She was responsible not only for the future of her own child but partly responsible for the future of his whole generation. Their family was influential not only due to the positions both Allucio and Anisia held in the government but as a role model. They were well-known to the press. Strangers often greeted them by name as their pictures had been on print many times, the most recent when they were taking Anrich to his first day in the new childcare facility in Banglion, the third one in the whole of Mother. Now, women could choose not to become mothers and, even when they did, they could choose not to dump overboard their whole professional career to take care of home and family. It had not been difficult for Anisia to leave Anrich at the childcare center, that is the way it had always been in Heaven. It was much harder for her female colleagues who had no such experience and had to deal with the cultural pressure of friends and family who could not understand how could they fail in their duties as mothers.

The central government in Banglion had thus benefited from a still small but increasing number of exceptionally good female employees. They still had to contend with the odd traditionalist but it was not only a female issue. There were a few men in some city councils, including Banglion which, being a newly created city, had no strong tradition of mothers handling local affairs. The city councils were still referred to by most people as the Council of Mothers. No man had yet reached the top post in a city council and there were none at the county level. While the edicts of the Supreme Priest had spread from the top down in the Civil Government, there had not been a similar pronouncement by the Great Council of Mothers. The law now allowed men and childless women to own property under certain circumstances, an artificial and hopefully temporary limitation established to avoid upsetting matters even more. But in some cities when men tried to do the required paperwork to allow them to buy property, they still met with obstacles ranging from delays and inconveniences to outright hostility and refusal.

"No more ships, Anrich. No trains either. Are you hungry, baby? We should be going home, shall we?", said Anisia. She knew it wasn't going to be that easy, the playground was on their way and Anrich would want to go to the slides. With any luck, no interesting barge would pass by while they were at it. Few people remained in the park. Night was near and most people would be at home or getting there to have their last meal of the day and prepare for hibernation. That was not the case in her family. Anrich was also an insomniac, he just slept a little longer during each of his naps at night but did not hibernate.

Not all insomniac couples had insomniac children. In a group of siblings, there could be a mix of sleepers and insomniacs. Banglion was a new city and didn't have the usual proportion of youngsters, families had not had time to grow yet. The kind of people the Civil Government attracted would usually delay having their first child. As far as Anisia knew, no sleeper family had yet had an insomniac child. Such a child often moved to a home with insomniacs during the night, usually relatives or close neighbors. Most people in Banglion had their relatives elsewhere, Anrich's was part of the first generation born there. Anisia learned this from Allucio as the domes in Heaven had always had communal night-care centers. They both agreed they would take care of a child if anyone asked, thus Anrich might have a night-brother. He often asked for his buddies in the childcare center, or wanted to go there to play with some toy but all the other kids were sleeping and the place was closed.

Contrary to other insomniac families, theirs was not idle at night. For many insomniacs the night meant solitude and idleness if not boredom. Night jobs were not very demanding. Barges chugged along quite easily on their own. Night watchmen and firemen were mostly on call, doing their rounds for lack of anything better to do. For Allucio and Anisia, it was the time to be in touch with Heaven. Admittedly it didn't take as much of their time as their daytime chores. It was mostly by the end of the night that they and their teams had to rush to put together the report for each of the subcommittees with all the information that they had received during the night.

Sometimes they had wished Anrich had been a sleeper. The guilt that Anisia felt about those outbursts made them seem more numerous than they had actually been. Allucio was a great father and partner. He had left his home quite young to study at Pinnacle and partly paid his studies working as a sailor so he was used to shoulder his share of the burden of a house. Anisia grew in a society were everyone was expected to share in ensuring the survival of their domed community. They were both used to run a tight ship. At night, an insomniac household was a closed community very much as a ship or a dome. It didn't have physical borders but there was not much help out there anyway. Sometimes it was overwhelming, but the rewards were immense, thought Anisia, just have a look at Anrich, wasn't he wonderful!
