# 24 - The Oath of Office

Commies, as they came to be known, were installed, on average, in about one of every five houses in the first ten cities where the wireless communication system had been deployed as well as in the towns and villages along the trunk lines. Probably a third of the population had easy access to the commies either at home, through a neighbor or at public places like train stations. That day almost all of them were listening to the very same broadcast, the proclamation of the new Charters. It was the first time in living memory that such a large part of the population was able to listen and somehow participate in such a momentous event as it was occurring.

The source of the broadcast was the High Temple at Pinnacle. The three news broadcasters were all transmitting from there, each with its own commentator describing the proceedings. The transmission had started an hour earlier with the description of the place, then the arrival of the guests, who was seated where close to whom or who was significantly missing. Almost everyone was seated in their assigned places by now and, before the bells struck the hour, the Supreme Priest, in his best ceremonial gown, walked to the platform where the highest members of the Priesthood were raising from their seats. Two seats remained empty, the Seat of Elvar for the Supreme Priest himself and one for the Great Mother, to his right.

As soon as the Supreme Priest reached the platform, he turned around to play host to the Great Mother who by tradition had the privilege of being the most honored guest whenever she was present. She arrived immediately after since they had only separated seconds ago just to perform this ritual. The Supreme Priest extended his hand to help her climb the three short steps which she accepted gracefully. Then he led her to her seat. She sat down and so did everyone else, except for the Supreme Priest who stood in front of his seat. They had come in shortly before the full hour so, as planned, the bells started striking the hour. As the last bell sounded, the Supreme Priest walked to the podium and started his discourse with the traditional words, "Sisters and Brothers, from the Seat of Elvar, I speak to you".

"Eight years ago I convened a committee to formulate a Charter of Basic Rights which would establish what every individual in this world is entitled to, whatever their beliefs, gender, age or origin might be. Here in my hand is the result of that effort", and he made a pause to highlight the formal proclamation, "From the Seat of Elvar, I declare that it is my will that this Charter of Basic Rights be recognized as the most basic law of our world".

After a pause for effect, he added, "It is our duty to defend, respect and uphold those basic principles. I, the Supreme Priest of Pinnacle, from the seat of Elvar, promise and swear to uphold the Charter of Basic Rights. Therefore, I renounce my privilege as the ultimate source of law in favor of this Charter".

It wasn't proper to do so inside the Temple but an applause was heard coming from outside, where loudspeakers had been installed to listen to the proceedings. The Supreme Priest waited for a while for the whispered comments to cease inside and continued, "In due course, all persons in any position of responsibility towards our society will take the oath to uphold this Charter. It is my privilege at this moment, to invite the Great Mother to do so".

It had been a hard fight to get the Council of Mothers to agree to the Charter. That alone probably wasted a year. The status quo granted them plenty of privileges which the Charter, with its emphasis on equality, destroyed. The piecemeal legislation that had been approved in the meantime had been well received not only by men but young and not-so-young women, which proved that the people was willing to accept those changes. In the end, there was little to surrender by accepting the Charter and much legitimacy to lose by rejecting it. Thus, the Great Mother walked to the podium where the Supreme Priest was waiting for her and after saluting each other by raising their hands to their chests, she turned to the podium where the Charter rested and said, "I, the Great Mother, promise and swear to uphold the Charter of Basic Rights".

Once she returned to her seat, the Supreme Priest continued, "We believe these rights to be universal and applicable to our world and any other. So do our neighbors at Heaven. However, due to the difference in between day and night cycles, almost all of them are hibernating at this time, however, the President of the Assembly, their highest authority, has produced a recording for us".

"Greetings from Heaven. My name is Gosmar and I hold the office of President of the Assembly of Heaven. By the time you hear this, it will be night in Heaven and I will be hibernating as will be my colleagues in the Assembly. However, the Supreme Priest has sent us a copy of the final version of the Charter of Basic Rights as well as earlier versions for our review and comments. It has been the unanimous consensus of this Assembly that this Charter of Basic Rights embodies the principles which, though unwritten, has guided us. Thus, in an unanimous vote of all the members of this Assembly as well as a large majority of the members of the local councils of Heaven, we have decided to proclaim this Charter of Basic Rights to be the basic law in Heaven. In consequence, I, Gosmar, President of the Assembly of Heaven, promise and declare my will to uphold the Charter of Basic Rights. I will now proceed to take the same oath from my colleagues in the Assembly".

The Supreme Priest stepped back to the podium and continued, "The recording, which will be available to anyone who wishes to hear it, continues with the oaths of the rest of the members of the Assembly. This attests to the universal validity of the principles embodied in this Charter. Just as President Gosmar, people of Mother taking the oath may affirm, declare or swear according to their religious beliefs or the lack of them".

"As I declared eight years ago, upon the proclamation of the Charter of Basic Rights I will establish the Supreme Court to which I will cede my authority as the higher magistrate of Mother. However, before doing so, the rules to guide the well-functioning of the Government need to be settled. A commission has been working on this while the transitional Civil Government has been acting on my behalf. The work of that commission is the Code for the Civil Government", which he raised in his hand and, after a pause, said, "From the Seat of Elvar, I declare that it is my will that the Code for the Civil Government be enacted".

"The law establishes the mechanism to elect the members of the Governing Council of Mother and for them to form the executive government. It also gives me the authority to dissolve the Council and its Government thus forcing the election of a new one. The current Council and Government were transitional until this Code became law. With my greatest gratitude to their members, I now dissolve the Council and the Government. They will continue acting in their current positions during the terms and under the conditions established in the Code".

And so it continued for another hour, with proclamations and oaths, starting with that of Master Enuas, for his remaining time in the office. The commentators filled in the silences in the proceedings with short biographies of those approaching the podium. The members of the Supreme Court of Justice were presented and sworn in, which was followed by the Supreme Priest renouncing his position as the single, top judge in favor of the collective Court which he nominally presided.

Once he finished designating and then taking the oath of office to the top-level members of the new Government, he returned to his seat, the Seat of Elvar, while Master Enuas made a brief discourse and then designated and took the oath of office to his secretaries and then the most senior judge made his discourse.

The Supreme Priest had been expecting and fearing this moment in equal parts. He was renouncing to a lot of power, in theory absolute power, though the reality of the negotiations he had just gone through, with more people and collectives than he had imagined, clearly showed the limits of that power. Future history books might see him as a great and humble man who gave up more power than Elvar himself ever surrendered, voluntarily, that is, or might condemn him for a fool. Would his reforms succeed? There would be much to do to ensure they do. The changes were fragile and would be so for quite some time. He could walk up to the podium right now and undo it all. He just needed to start with the words, "From the Seat of Elvar, I declare that it is my will ..." and everything would go back. Many still wished he would do exactly that, the Great Mother to his right amongst them. It was not completely fair, she also had her pressures to cope with both from those who wanted to change everything and those who didn't. She had to strike a balance as he had done, with the difference that it had been his choice to start it all while she got stuck with it.

What about the rest? He looked around the arch of chairs at either side of his. Most of them were much older than himself and once he got elected in the last Conclave they knew they had reached the top of their careers. They might not even be around for the next Conclave, either retired or dead. Most of them were very happy seated where they were, they had exhausted their ambitions. They had been quite happy as Enuas' government took some responsibilities from their frail shoulders. Then there were his allies and his enemies, three on each side. His allies looked happy, his enemies remained rigid in their poses.

The Priesthood would be decimated, or so some of them said, and it would probably be true. As the government was no longer in the hands of the Priesthood, many would leave. That was fine with him, he wanted real priests with true vocation, the rest could become civil servants and drop the pretense of piety. He had always hated the hypocrisy in so much of the Priesthood. What remained of it had to be rearranged into their new roles, those that they should have always had, humble servants and caretakers of the souls of their flock. A couple of his enemies resented their loss of power over so many people but they were truly pious and devout. He would keep them happy by giving them power to rearrange the Priesthood into their new roll, the one they should have never left.

The danger was in the younger generation, now seated behind the members of the government and the judiciary right in front of the podium. One of them would surely succeed him. Would they carry on with his reforms? How long until they become solidly established and thus irreversible? At this point, it would be a gamble. In a few years ... how many? Elvar wanted his seat to be simple and modest and though he accepted a little decoration here and there, the seat was not comfortable, even with the cushion that one of his predecessors added. It was a good reminder that you shouldn't stay in that seat for long. He was 12 years away of the traditional retirement age. It should be plenty of time.

Right now, all the oath taking and the discourses were coming to an end. He would go to the podium and lead a prayer. Most would join, if only because of custom, a few would abstain remaining in respectful silence. Would anyone conspicuously leave? He doubted it. He knew the Temple would never again be so full of people. The seat of spiritual power would never attract as many people as the center of actual power would. But he wasn't in the business of counting heads but of caring for their souls.
